

CHAPTER XII. Positively the Last Appearance of the Broadwood Grand

England is supposed to be unmusical; but without dwelling on the
patronage extended to the organ-grinder, without seeking to found any
argument on the prevalence of the jew’s trump, there is surely one
instrument that may be said to be national in the fullest acceptance
of the word. The herdboy in the broom, already musical in the days of
Father Chaucer, startles (and perhaps pains) the lark with this exiguous
pipe; and in the hands of the skilled bricklayer,

‘The thing becomes a trumpet, whence he blows’

(as a general rule) either ‘The British Grenadiers’ or ‘Cherry Ripe’.
The latter air is indeed the shibboleth and diploma piece of the
penny whistler; I hazard a guess it was originally composed for this
instrument. It is singular enough that a man should be able to gain
a livelihood, or even to tide over a period of unemployment, by the
display of his proficiency upon the penny whistle; still more so, that
the professional should almost invariably confine himself to ‘Cherry
Ripe’. But indeed, singularities surround the subject, thick like
blackberries. Why, for instance, should the pipe be called a penny
whistle? I think no one ever bought it for a penny. Why should the
alternative name be tin whistle? I am grossly deceived if it be made
of tin. Lastly, in what deaf catacomb, in what earless desert, does the
beginner pass the excruciating interval of his apprenticeship? We have
all heard people learning the piano, the fiddle, and the cornet; but
the young of the penny whistler (like that of the salmon) is occult from
observation; he is never heard until proficient; and providence (perhaps
alarmed by the works of Mr Mallock) defends human hearing from his first
attempts upon the upper octave.

A really noteworthy thing was taking place in a green lane, not far from
Padwick. On the bench of a carrier’s cart there sat a tow-headed, lanky,
modest-looking youth; the reins were on his lap; the whip lay behind
him in the interior of the cart; the horse proceeded without guidance
or encouragement; the carrier (or the carrier’s man), rapt into a higher
sphere than that of his daily occupations, his looks dwelling on the
skies, devoted himself wholly to a brand-new D penny whistle, whence he
diffidently endeavoured to elicit that pleasing melody ‘The Ploughboy’.
To any observant person who should have chanced to saunter in that lane,
the hour would have been thrilling. ‘Here at last,’ he would have said,
‘is the beginner.’

The tow-headed youth (whose name was Harker) had just encored himself
for the nineteenth time, when he was struck into the extreme of
confusion by the discovery that he was not alone.

‘There you have it!’ cried a manly voice from the side of the road.

‘That’s as good as I want to hear. Perhaps a leetle oilier in the run,’
the voice suggested, with meditative gusto. ‘Give it us again.’

Harker glanced, from the depths of his humiliation, at the speaker. He
beheld a powerful, sun-brown, clean-shaven fellow, about forty years of
age, striding beside the cart with a non-commissioned military bearing,
and (as he strode) spinning in the air a cane. The fellow’s clothes were
very bad, but he looked clean and self-reliant.

‘I’m only a beginner,’ gasped the blushing Harker, ‘I didn’t think
anybody could hear me.’

‘Well, I like that!’ returned the other. ‘You’re a pretty old beginner.
Come, I’ll give you a lead myself. Give us a seat here beside you.’

The next moment the military gentleman was perched on the cart, pipe in
hand. He gave the instrument a knowing rattle on the shaft, mouthed it,
appeared to commune for a moment with the muse, and dashed into ‘The
girl I left behind me’. He was a great, rather than a fine, performer;
he lacked the bird-like richness; he could scarce have extracted all
the honey out of ‘Cherry Ripe’; he did not fear--he even ostentatiously
displayed and seemed to revel in he shrillness of the instrument; but
in fire, speed, precision, evenness, and fluency; in linked agility of
jimmy--a technical expression, by your leave, answering to warblers on
the bagpipe; and perhaps, above all, in that inspiring side-glance of
the eye, with which he followed the effect and (as by a human appeal)
eked out the insufficiency of his performance: in these, the fellow
stood without a rival. Harker listened: ‘The girl I left behind me’
filled him with despair; ‘The Soldier’s Joy’ carried him beyond jealousy
into generous enthusiasm.

‘Turn about,’ said the military gentleman, offering the pipe.

‘O, not after you!’ cried Harker; ‘you’re a professional.’

‘No,’ said his companion; ‘an amatyure like yourself. That’s one style
of play, yours is the other, and I like it best. But I began when I was
a boy, you see, before my taste was formed. When you’re my age you’ll
play that thing like a cornet-a-piston. Give us that air again; how does
it go?’ and he affected to endeavour to recall ‘The Ploughboy’.

A timid, insane hope sprang in the breast of Harker. Was it possible?
Was there something in his playing? It had, indeed, seemed to him at
times as if he got a kind of a richness out of it. Was he a genius?
Meantime the military gentleman stumbled over the air.

‘No,’ said the unhappy Harker, ‘that’s not quite it. It goes this
way--just to show you.’

And, taking the pipe between his lips, he sealed his doom. When he had
played the air, and then a second time, and a third; when the military
gentleman had tried it once more, and once more failed; when it became
clear to Harker that he, the blushing debutant, was actually giving a
lesson to this full-grown flutist--and the flutist under his care was
not very brilliantly progressing--how am I to tell what floods of glory
brightened the autumnal countryside; how, unless the reader were an
amateur himself, describe the heights of idiotic vanity to which
the carrier climbed? One significant fact shall paint the situation:
thenceforth it was Harker who played, and the military gentleman
listened and approved.

As he listened, however, he did not forget the habit of soldierly
precaution, looking both behind and before. He looked behind and
computed the value of the carrier’s load, divining the contents of the
brown-paper parcels and the portly hamper, and briefly setting down the
grand piano in the brand-new piano-case as ‘difficult to get rid of’.
He looked before, and spied at the corner of the green lane a little
country public-house embowered in roses. ‘I’ll have a shy at it,’
concluded the military gentleman, and roundly proposed a glass. ‘Well,
I’m not a drinking man,’ said Harker.

‘Look here, now,’ cut in the other, ‘I’ll tell you who I am: I’m
Colour-Sergeant Brand of the Blankth. That’ll tell you if I’m a drinking
man or not.’ It might and it might not, thus a Greek chorus would have
intervened, and gone on to point out how very far it fell short of
telling why the sergeant was tramping a country lane in tatters; or even
to argue that he must have pretermitted some while ago his labours for
the general defence, and (in the interval) possibly turned his attention
to oakum. But there was no Greek chorus present; and the man of war went
on to contend that drinking was one thing and a friendly glass another.

In the Blue Lion, which was the name of the country public-house,
Colour-Sergeant Brand introduced his new friend, Mr Harker, to a
number of ingenious mixtures, calculated to prevent the approaches of
intoxication. These he explained to be ‘rekisite’ in the service, so
that a self-respecting officer should always appear upon parade in a
condition honourable to his corps. The most efficacious of these devices
was to lace a pint of mild ale with twopenceworth of London gin. I am
pleased to hand in this recipe to the discerning reader, who may find
it useful even in civil station; for its effect upon Mr Harker was
revolutionary. He must be helped on board his own waggon, where he
proceeded to display a spirit entirely given over to mirth and music,
alternately hooting with laughter, to which the sergeant hastened to
bear chorus, and incoherently tootling on the pipe. The man of war,
meantime, unostentatiously possessed himself of the reins. It was plain
he had a taste for the secluded beauties of an English landscape; for
the cart, although it wandered under his guidance for some time, was
never observed to issue on the dusty highway, journeying between hedge
and ditch, and for the most part under overhanging boughs. It was plain,
besides, he had an eye to the true interests of Mr Harker; for though
the cart drew up more than once at the doors of public-houses, it was
only the sergeant who set foot to ground, and, being equipped himself
with a quart bottle, once more proceeded on his rural drive.

To give any idea of the complexity of the sergeant’s course, a map of
that part of Middlesex would be required, and my publisher is averse
from the expense. Suffice it, that a little after the night had closed,
the cart was brought to a standstill in a woody road; where the sergeant
lifted from among the parcels, and tenderly deposited upon the wayside,
the inanimate form of Harker.

‘If you come-to before daylight,’ thought the sergeant, ‘I shall be
surprised for one.’

From the various pockets of the slumbering carrier he gently collected
the sum of seventeen shillings and eightpence sterling; and, getting
once more into the cart, drove thoughtfully away.

‘If I was exactly sure of where I was, it would be a good job,’ he
reflected. ‘Anyway, here’s a corner.’

He turned it, and found himself upon the riverside. A little above him
the lights of a houseboat shone cheerfully; and already close at hand,
so close that it was impossible to avoid their notice, three persons, a
lady and two gentlemen, were deliberately drawing near. The sergeant put
his trust in the convenient darkness of the night, and drove on to meet
them. One of the gentlemen, who was of a portly figure, walked in the
midst of the fairway, and presently held up a staff by way of signal.

‘My man, have you seen anything of a carrier’s cart?’ he cried.

Dark as it was, it seemed to the sergeant as though the slimmer of
the two gentlemen had made a motion to prevent the other speaking, and
(finding himself too late) had skipped aside with some alacrity. At
another season, Sergeant Brand would have paid more attention to the
fact; but he was then immersed in the perils of his own predicament.

‘A carrier’s cart?’ said he, with a perceptible uncertainty of voice.
‘No, sir.’

‘Ah!’ said the portly gentleman, and stood aside to let the sergeant
pass. The lady appeared to bend forward and study the cart with every
mark of sharpened curiosity, the slimmer gentleman still keeping in the
rear.

‘I wonder what the devil they would be at,’ thought Sergeant Brand; and,
looking fearfully back, he saw the trio standing together in the midst
of the way, like folk consulting. The bravest of military heroes are
not always equal to themselves as to their reputation; and fear, on some
singular provocation, will find a lodgment in the most unfamiliar bosom.
The word ‘detective’ might have been heard to gurgle in the sergeant’s
throat; and vigorously applying the whip, he fled up the riverside road
to Great Haverham, at the gallop of the carrier’s horse. The lights of
the houseboat flashed upon the flying waggon as it passed; the beat of
hoofs and the rattle of the vehicle gradually coalesced and died away;
and presently, to the trio on the riverside, silence had redescended.

‘It’s the most extraordinary thing,’ cried the slimmer of the two
gentlemen, ‘but that’s the cart.’

‘And I know I saw a piano,’ said the girl.

‘O, it’s the cart, certainly; and the extraordinary thing is, it’s not
the man,’ added the first.

‘It must be the man, Gid, it must be,’ said the portly one.

‘Well, then, why is he running away?’ asked Gideon.

‘His horse bolted, I suppose,’ said the Squirradical.

‘Nonsense! I heard the whip going like a flail,’ said Gideon. ‘It simply
defies the human reason.’

‘I’ll tell you,’ broke in the girl, ‘he came round that corner. Suppose
we went and--what do you call it in books?--followed his trail? There
may be a house there, or somebody who saw him, or something.’

‘Well, suppose we did, for the fun of the thing,’ said Gideon.

The fun of the thing (it would appear) consisted in the extremely close
juxtaposition of himself and Miss Hazeltine. To Uncle Ned, who was
excluded from these simple pleasures, the excursion appeared hopeless
from the first; and when a fresh perspective of darkness opened up,
dimly contained between park palings on the one side and a hedge and
ditch upon the other, the whole without the smallest signal of human
habitation, the Squirradical drew up.

‘This is a wild-goose chase,’ said he.

With the cessation of the footfalls, another sound smote upon their
ears.

‘O, what’s that?’ cried Julia.

‘I can’t think,’ said Gideon.

The Squirradical had his stick presented like a sword. ‘Gid,’ he began,
‘Gid, I--’

‘O Mr Forsyth!’ cried the girl. ‘O don’t go forward, you don’t know what
it might be--it might be something perfectly horrid.’

‘It may be the devil itself,’ said Gideon, disengaging himself, ‘but I
am going to see it.’

‘Don’t be rash, Gid,’ cried his uncle.

The barrister drew near to the sound, which was certainly of a
portentous character. In quality it appeared to blend the strains of
the cow, the fog-horn, and the mosquito; and the startling manner of its
enunciation added incalculably to its terrors. A dark object, not unlike
the human form divine, appeared on the brink of the ditch.

‘It’s a man,’ said Gideon, ‘it’s only a man; he seems to be asleep and
snoring. Hullo,’ he added, a moment after, ‘there must be something
wrong with him, he won’t waken.’

Gideon produced his vestas, struck one, and by its light recognized the
tow head of Harker.

‘This is the man,’ said he, ‘as drunk as Belial. I see the whole story’;
and to his two companions, who had now ventured to rejoin him, he set
forth a theory of the divorce between the carrier and his cart, which
was not unlike the truth.

‘Drunken brute!’ said Uncle Ned, ‘let’s get him to a pump and give him
what he deserves.’

‘Not at all!’ said Gideon. ‘It is highly undesirable he should see us
together; and really, do you know, I am very much obliged to him, for
this is about the luckiest thing that could have possibly occurred. It
seems to me--Uncle Ned, I declare to heaven it seems to me--I’m clear of
it!’

‘Clear of what?’ asked the Squirradical.

‘The whole affair!’ cried Gideon. ‘That man has been ass enough to steal
the cart and the dead body; what he hopes to do with it I neither know
nor care. My hands are free, Jimson ceases; down with Jimson. Shake
hands with me, Uncle Ned--Julia, darling girl, Julia, I--’

‘Gideon, Gideon!’ said his uncle. ‘O, it’s all right, uncle, when
we’re going to be married so soon,’ said Gideon. ‘You know you said so
yourself in the houseboat.’

‘Did I?’ said Uncle Ned; ‘I am certain I said no such thing.’

‘Appeal to him, tell him he did, get on his soft side,’ cried Gideon.
‘He’s a real brick if you get on his soft side.’

‘Dear Mr Bloomfield,’ said Julia, ‘I know Gideon will be such a very
good boy, and he has promised me to do such a lot of law, and I will
see that he does too. And you know it is so very steadying to young men,
everybody admits that; though, of course, I know I have no money, Mr
Bloomfield,’ she added.

‘My dear young lady, as this rapscallion told you today on the boat,
Uncle Ned has plenty,’ said the Squirradical, ‘and I can never forget
that you have been shamefully defrauded. So as there’s nobody looking,
you had better give your Uncle Ned a kiss. There, you rogue,’ resumed
Mr Bloomfield, when the ceremony had been daintily performed, ‘this very
pretty young lady is yours, and a vast deal more than you deserve. But
now, let us get back to the houseboat, get up steam on the launch, and
away back to town.’

‘That’s the thing!’ cried Gideon; ‘and tomorrow there will be no
houseboat, and no Jimson, and no carrier’s cart, and no piano; and when
Harker awakes on the ditchside, he may tell himself the whole affair has
been a dream.’

‘Aha!’ said Uncle Ned, ‘but there’s another man who will have a
different awakening. That fellow in the cart will find he has been too
clever by half.’

‘Uncle Ned and Julia,’ said Gideon, ‘I am as happy as the King of
Tartary, my heart is like a threepenny-bit, my heels are like feathers;
I am out of all my troubles, Julia’s hand is in mine. Is this a time
for anything but handsome sentiments? Why, there’s not room in me for
anything that’s not angelic! And when I think of that poor unhappy devil
in the cart, I stand here in the night and cry with a single heart God
help him!’

‘Amen,’ said Uncle Ned.

