

CHAPTER I


The one opened the door with a latch-key and went in, followed by a young
fellow who awkwardly removed his cap.  He wore rough clothes that smacked
of the sea, and he was manifestly out of place in the spacious hall in
which he found himself.  He did not know what to do with his cap, and was
stuffing it into his coat pocket when the other took it from him.  The
act was done quietly and naturally, and the awkward young fellow
appreciated it.  "He understands," was his thought.  "He'll see me
through all right."

He walked at the other's heels with a swing to his shoulders, and his
legs spread unwittingly, as if the level floors were tilting up and
sinking down to the heave and lunge of the sea.  The wide rooms seemed
too narrow for his rolling gait, and to himself he was in terror lest his
broad shoulders should collide with the doorways or sweep the bric-a-brac
from the low mantel.  He recoiled from side to side between the various
objects and multiplied the hazards that in reality lodged only in his
mind.  Between a grand piano and a centre-table piled high with books was
space for a half a dozen to walk abreast, yet he essayed it with
trepidation.  His heavy arms hung loosely at his sides.  He did not know
what to do with those arms and hands, and when, to his excited vision,
one arm seemed liable to brush against the books on the table, he lurched
away like a frightened horse, barely missing the piano stool.  He watched
the easy walk of the other in front of him, and for the first time
realized that his walk was different from that of other men.  He
experienced a momentary pang of shame that he should walk so uncouthly.
The sweat burst through the skin of his forehead in tiny beads, and he
paused and mopped his bronzed face with his handkerchief.

"Hold on, Arthur, my boy," he said, attempting to mask his anxiety with
facetious utterance.  "This is too much all at once for yours truly.  Give
me a chance to get my nerve.  You know I didn't want to come, an' I guess
your fam'ly ain't hankerin' to see me neither."

"That's all right," was the reassuring answer.  "You mustn't be
frightened at us.  We're just homely people--Hello, there's a letter for
me."

He stepped back to the table, tore open the envelope, and began to read,
giving the stranger an opportunity to recover himself.  And the stranger
understood and appreciated.  His was the gift of sympathy, understanding;
and beneath his alarmed exterior that sympathetic process went on.  He
mopped his forehead dry and glanced about him with a controlled face,
though in the eyes there was an expression such as wild animals betray
when they fear the trap.  He was surrounded by the unknown, apprehensive
of what might happen, ignorant of what he should do, aware that he walked
and bore himself awkwardly, fearful that every attribute and power of him
was similarly afflicted.  He was keenly sensitive, hopelessly
self-conscious, and the amused glance that the other stole privily at him
over the top of the letter burned into him like a dagger-thrust.  He saw
the glance, but he gave no sign, for among the things he had learned was
discipline.  Also, that dagger-thrust went to his pride.  He cursed
himself for having come, and at the same time resolved that, happen what
would, having come, he would carry it through.  The lines of his face
hardened, and into his eyes came a fighting light.  He looked about more
unconcernedly, sharply observant, every detail of the pretty interior
registering itself on his brain.  His eyes were wide apart; nothing in
their field of vision escaped; and as they drank in the beauty before
them the fighting light died out and a warm glow took its place.  He was
responsive to beauty, and here was cause to respond.

An oil painting caught and held him.  A heavy surf thundered and burst
over an outjutting rock; lowering storm-clouds covered the sky; and,
outside the line of surf, a pilot-schooner, close-hauled, heeled over
till every detail of her deck was visible, was surging along against a
stormy sunset sky.  There was beauty, and it drew him irresistibly.  He
forgot his awkward walk and came closer to the painting, very close.  The
beauty faded out of the canvas.  His face expressed his bepuzzlement.  He
stared at what seemed a careless daub of paint, then stepped away.
Immediately all the beauty flashed back into the canvas.  "A trick
picture," was his thought, as he dismissed it, though in the midst of the
multitudinous impressions he was receiving he found time to feel a prod
of indignation that so much beauty should be sacrificed to make a trick.
He did not know painting.  He had been brought up on chromos and
lithographs that were always definite and sharp, near or far.  He had
seen oil paintings, it was true, in the show windows of shops, but the
glass of the windows had prevented his eager eyes from approaching too
near.

He glanced around at his friend reading the letter and saw the books on
the table.  Into his eyes leaped a wistfulness and a yearning as promptly
as the yearning leaps into the eyes of a starving man at sight of food.
An impulsive stride, with one lurch to right and left of the shoulders,
brought him to the table, where he began affectionately handling the
books.  He glanced at the titles and the authors' names, read fragments
of text, caressing the volumes with his eyes and hands, and, once,
recognized a book he had read.  For the rest, they were strange books and
strange authors.  He chanced upon a volume of Swinburne and began reading
steadily, forgetful of where he was, his face glowing.  Twice he closed
the book on his forefinger to look at the name of the author.  Swinburne!
he would remember that name.  That fellow had eyes, and he had certainly
seen color and flashing light.  But who was Swinburne?  Was he dead a
hundred years or so, like most of the poets?  Or was he alive still, and
writing?  He turned to the title-page . . . yes, he had written other
books; well, he would go to the free library the first thing in the
morning and try to get hold of some of Swinburne's stuff.  He went back
to the text and lost himself.  He did not notice that a young woman had
entered the room.  The first he knew was when he heard Arthur's voice
saying:-

"Ruth, this is Mr. Eden."

The book was closed on his forefinger, and before he turned he was
thrilling to the first new impression, which was not of the girl, but of
her brother's words.  Under that muscled body of his he was a mass of
quivering sensibilities.  At the slightest impact of the outside world
upon his consciousness, his thoughts, sympathies, and emotions leapt and
played like lambent flame.  He was extraordinarily receptive and
responsive, while his imagination, pitched high, was ever at work
establishing relations of likeness and difference.  "Mr. Eden," was what
he had thrilled to--he who had been called "Eden," or "Martin Eden," or
just "Martin," all his life.  And "_Mister_!"  It was certainly going
some, was his internal comment.  His mind seemed to turn, on the instant,
into a vast camera obscura, and he saw arrayed around his consciousness
endless pictures from his life, of stoke-holes and forecastles, camps and
beaches, jails and boozing-kens, fever-hospitals and slum streets,
wherein the thread of association was the fashion in which he had been
addressed in those various situations.

And then he turned and saw the girl.  The phantasmagoria of his brain
vanished at sight of her.  She was a pale, ethereal creature, with wide,
spiritual blue eyes and a wealth of golden hair.  He did not know how she
was dressed, except that the dress was as wonderful as she.  He likened
her to a pale gold flower upon a slender stem.  No, she was a spirit, a
divinity, a goddess; such sublimated beauty was not of the earth.  Or
perhaps the books were right, and there were many such as she in the
upper walks of life.  She might well be sung by that chap, Swinburne.
Perhaps he had had somebody like her in mind when he painted that girl,
Iseult, in the book there on the table.  All this plethora of sight, and
feeling, and thought occurred on the instant.  There was no pause of the
realities wherein he moved.  He saw her hand coming out to his, and she
looked him straight in the eyes as she shook hands, frankly, like a man.
The women he had known did not shake hands that way.  For that matter,
most of them did not shake hands at all.  A flood of associations,
visions of various ways he had made the acquaintance of women, rushed
into his mind and threatened to swamp it.  But he shook them aside and
looked at her.  Never had he seen such a woman.  The women he had known!
Immediately, beside her, on either hand, ranged the women he had known.
For an eternal second he stood in the midst of a portrait gallery,
wherein she occupied the central place, while about her were limned many
women, all to be weighed and measured by a fleeting glance, herself the
unit of weight and measure.  He saw the weak and sickly faces of the
girls of the factories, and the simpering, boisterous girls from the
south of Market.  There were women of the cattle camps, and swarthy
cigarette-smoking women of Old Mexico.  These, in turn, were crowded out
by Japanese women, doll-like, stepping mincingly on wooden clogs; by
Eurasians, delicate featured, stamped with degeneracy; by full-bodied
South-Sea-Island women, flower-crowned and brown-skinned.  All these were
blotted out by a grotesque and terrible nightmare brood--frowsy,
shuffling creatures from the pavements of Whitechapel, gin-bloated hags
of the stews, and all the vast hell's following of harpies, vile-mouthed
and filthy, that under the guise of monstrous female form prey upon
sailors, the scrapings of the ports, the scum and slime of the human pit.

"Won't you sit down, Mr. Eden?" the girl was saying.  "I have been
looking forward to meeting you ever since Arthur told us.  It was brave
of you--"

He waved his hand deprecatingly and muttered that it was nothing at all,
what he had done, and that any fellow would have done it.  She noticed
that the hand he waved was covered with fresh abrasions, in the process
of healing, and a glance at the other loose-hanging hand showed it to be
in the same condition.  Also, with quick, critical eye, she noted a scar
on his cheek, another that peeped out from under the hair of the
forehead, and a third that ran down and disappeared under the starched
collar.  She repressed a smile at sight of the red line that marked the
chafe of the collar against the bronzed neck.  He was evidently unused to
stiff collars.  Likewise her feminine eye took in the clothes he wore,
the cheap and unaesthetic cut, the wrinkling of the coat across the
shoulders, and the series of wrinkles in the sleeves that advertised
bulging biceps muscles.

While he waved his hand and muttered that he had done nothing at all, he
was obeying her behest by trying to get into a chair.  He found time to
admire the ease with which she sat down, then lurched toward a chair
facing her, overwhelmed with consciousness of the awkward figure he was
cutting.  This was a new experience for him.  All his life, up to then,
he had been unaware of being either graceful or awkward.  Such thoughts
of self had never entered his mind.  He sat down gingerly on the edge of
the chair, greatly worried by his hands.  They were in the way wherever
he put them.  Arthur was leaving the room, and Martin Eden followed his
exit with longing eyes.  He felt lost, alone there in the room with that
pale spirit of a woman.  There was no bar-keeper upon whom to call for
drinks, no small boy to send around the corner for a can of beer and by
means of that social fluid start the amenities of friendship flowing.

"You have such a scar on your neck, Mr. Eden," the girl was saying.  "How
did it happen?  I am sure it must have been some adventure."

"A Mexican with a knife, miss," he answered, moistening his parched lips
and clearing his throat.  "It was just a fight.  After I got the knife
away, he tried to bite off my nose."

Baldly as he had stated it, in his eyes was a rich vision of that hot,
starry night at Salina Cruz, the white strip of beach, the lights of the
sugar steamers in the harbor, the voices of the drunken sailors in the
distance, the jostling stevedores, the flaming passion in the Mexican's
face, the glint of the beast-eyes in the starlight, the sting of the
steel in his neck, and the rush of blood, the crowd and the cries, the
two bodies, his and the Mexican's, locked together, rolling over and over
and tearing up the sand, and from away off somewhere the mellow tinkling
of a guitar.  Such was the picture, and he thrilled to the memory of it,
wondering if the man could paint it who had painted the pilot-schooner on
the wall.  The white beach, the stars, and the lights of the sugar
steamers would look great, he thought, and midway on the sand the dark
group of figures that surrounded the fighters.  The knife occupied a
place in the picture, he decided, and would show well, with a sort of
gleam, in the light of the stars.  But of all this no hint had crept into
his speech.  "He tried to bite off my nose," he concluded.

"Oh," the girl said, in a faint, far voice, and he noticed the shock in
her sensitive face.

He felt a shock himself, and a blush of embarrassment shone faintly on
his sunburned cheeks, though to him it burned as hotly as when his cheeks
had been exposed to the open furnace-door in the fire-room.  Such sordid
things as stabbing affrays were evidently not fit subjects for
conversation with a lady.  People in the books, in her walk of life, did
not talk about such things--perhaps they did not know about them, either.

There was a brief pause in the conversation they were trying to get
started.  Then she asked tentatively about the scar on his cheek.  Even
as she asked, he realized that she was making an effort to talk his talk,
and he resolved to get away from it and talk hers.

"It was just an accident," he said, putting his hand to his cheek.  "One
night, in a calm, with a heavy sea running, the main-boom-lift carried
away, an' next the tackle.  The lift was wire, an' it was threshin'
around like a snake.  The whole watch was tryin' to grab it, an' I rushed
in an' got swatted."

"Oh," she said, this time with an accent of comprehension, though
secretly his speech had been so much Greek to her and she was wondering
what a _lift_ was and what _swatted_ meant.

"This man Swineburne," he began, attempting to put his plan into
execution and pronouncing the i long.

"Who?"

"Swineburne," he repeated, with the same mispronunciation.  "The poet."

"Swinburne," she corrected.

"Yes, that's the chap," he stammered, his cheeks hot again.  "How long
since he died?"

"Why, I haven't heard that he was dead."  She looked at him curiously.
"Where did you make his acquaintance?"

"I never clapped eyes on him," was the reply.  "But I read some of his
poetry out of that book there on the table just before you come in.  How
do you like his poetry?"

And thereat she began to talk quickly and easily upon the subject he had
suggested.  He felt better, and settled back slightly from the edge of
the chair, holding tightly to its arms with his hands, as if it might get
away from him and buck him to the floor.  He had succeeded in making her
talk her talk, and while she rattled on, he strove to follow her,
marvelling at all the knowledge that was stowed away in that pretty head
of hers, and drinking in the pale beauty of her face.  Follow her he did,
though bothered by unfamiliar words that fell glibly from her lips and by
critical phrases and thought-processes that were foreign to his mind, but
that nevertheless stimulated his mind and set it tingling.  Here was
intellectual life, he thought, and here was beauty, warm and wonderful as
he had never dreamed it could be.  He forgot himself and stared at her
with hungry eyes.  Here was something to live for, to win to, to fight
for--ay, and die for.  The books were true.  There were such women in the
world.  She was one of them.  She lent wings to his imagination, and
great, luminous canvases spread themselves before him whereon loomed
vague, gigantic figures of love and romance, and of heroic deeds for
woman's sake--for a pale woman, a flower of gold.  And through the
swaying, palpitant vision, as through a fairy mirage, he stared at the
real woman, sitting there and talking of literature and art.  He listened
as well, but he stared, unconscious of the fixity of his gaze or of the
fact that all that was essentially masculine in his nature was shining in
his eyes.  But she, who knew little of the world of men, being a woman,
was keenly aware of his burning eyes.  She had never had men look at her
in such fashion, and it embarrassed her.  She stumbled and halted in her
utterance.  The thread of argument slipped from her.  He frightened her,
and at the same time it was strangely pleasant to be so looked upon.  Her
training warned her of peril and of wrong, subtle, mysterious, luring;
while her instincts rang clarion-voiced through her being, impelling her
to hurdle caste and place and gain to this traveller from another world,
to this uncouth young fellow with lacerated hands and a line of raw red
caused by the unaccustomed linen at his throat, who, all too evidently,
was soiled and tainted by ungracious existence.  She was clean, and her
cleanness revolted; but she was woman, and she was just beginning to
learn the paradox of woman.

"As I was saying--what was I saying?"  She broke off abruptly and laughed
merrily at her predicament.

"You was saying that this man Swinburne failed bein' a great poet
because--an' that was as far as you got, miss," he prompted, while to
himself he seemed suddenly hungry, and delicious little thrills crawled
up and down his spine at the sound of her laughter.  Like silver, he
thought to himself, like tinkling silver bells; and on the instant, and
for an instant, he was transported to a far land, where under pink cherry
blossoms, he smoked a cigarette and listened to the bells of the peaked
pagoda calling straw-sandalled devotees to worship.

"Yes, thank you," she said.  "Swinburne fails, when all is said, because
he is, well, indelicate.  There are many of his poems that should never
be read.  Every line of the really great poets is filled with beautiful
truth, and calls to all that is high and noble in the human.  Not a line
of the great poets can be spared without impoverishing the world by that
much."

"I thought it was great," he said hesitatingly, "the little I read.  I
had no idea he was such a--a scoundrel.  I guess that crops out in his
other books."

"There are many lines that could be spared from the book you were
reading," she said, her voice primly firm and dogmatic.

"I must 'a' missed 'em," he announced.  "What I read was the real goods.
It was all lighted up an' shining, an' it shun right into me an' lighted
me up inside, like the sun or a searchlight.  That's the way it landed on
me, but I guess I ain't up much on poetry, miss."

He broke off lamely.  He was confused, painfully conscious of his
inarticulateness.  He had felt the bigness and glow of life in what he
had read, but his speech was inadequate.  He could not express what he
felt, and to himself he likened himself to a sailor, in a strange ship,
on a dark night, groping about in the unfamiliar running rigging.  Well,
he decided, it was up to him to get acquainted in this new world.  He had
never seen anything that he couldn't get the hang of when he wanted to
and it was about time for him to want to learn to talk the things that
were inside of him so that she could understand.  _She_ was bulking large
on his horizon.

"Now Longfellow--" she was saying.

"Yes, I've read 'm," he broke in impulsively, spurred on to exhibit and
make the most of his little store of book knowledge, desirous of showing
her that he was not wholly a stupid clod.  "'The Psalm of Life,'
'Excelsior,' an' . . . I guess that's all."

She nodded her head and smiled, and he felt, somehow, that her smile was
tolerant, pitifully tolerant.  He was a fool to attempt to make a
pretence that way.  That Longfellow chap most likely had written
countless books of poetry.

"Excuse me, miss, for buttin' in that way.  I guess the real facts is
that I don't know nothin' much about such things.  It ain't in my class.
But I'm goin' to make it in my class."

It sounded like a threat.  His voice was determined, his eyes were
flashing, the lines of his face had grown harsh.  And to her it seemed
that the angle of his jaw had changed; its pitch had become unpleasantly
aggressive.  At the same time a wave of intense virility seemed to surge
out from him and impinge upon her.

"I think you could make it in--in your class," she finished with a laugh.
"You are very strong."

Her gaze rested for a moment on the muscular neck, heavy corded, almost
bull-like, bronzed by the sun, spilling over with rugged health and
strength.  And though he sat there, blushing and humble, again she felt
drawn to him.  She was surprised by a wanton thought that rushed into her
mind.  It seemed to her that if she could lay her two hands upon that
neck that all its strength and vigor would flow out to her.  She was
shocked by this thought.  It seemed to reveal to her an undreamed
depravity in her nature.  Besides, strength to her was a gross and
brutish thing.  Her ideal of masculine beauty had always been slender
gracefulness.  Yet the thought still persisted.  It bewildered her that
she should desire to place her hands on that sunburned neck.  In truth,
she was far from robust, and the need of her body and mind was for
strength.  But she did not know it.  She knew only that no man had ever
affected her before as this one had, who shocked her from moment to
moment with his awful grammar.

"Yes, I ain't no invalid," he said.  "When it comes down to hard-pan, I
can digest scrap-iron.  But just now I've got dyspepsia.  Most of what
you was sayin' I can't digest.  Never trained that way, you see.  I like
books and poetry, and what time I've had I've read 'em, but I've never
thought about 'em the way you have.  That's why I can't talk about 'em.
I'm like a navigator adrift on a strange sea without chart or compass.
Now I want to get my bearin's.  Mebbe you can put me right.  How did you
learn all this you've ben talkin'?"

"By going to school, I fancy, and by studying," she answered.

"I went to school when I was a kid," he began to object.

"Yes; but I mean high school, and lectures, and the university."

"You've gone to the university?" he demanded in frank amazement.  He felt
that she had become remoter from him by at least a million miles.

"I'm going there now.  I'm taking special courses in English."

He did not know what "English" meant, but he made a mental note of that
item of ignorance and passed on.

"How long would I have to study before I could go to the university?" he
asked.

She beamed encouragement upon his desire for knowledge, and said: "That
depends upon how much studying you have already done.  You have never
attended high school?  Of course not.  But did you finish grammar
school?"

"I had two years to run, when I left," he answered.  "But I was always
honorably promoted at school."

The next moment, angry with himself for the boast, he had gripped the
arms of the chair so savagely that every finger-end was stinging.  At the
same moment he became aware that a woman was entering the room.  He saw
the girl leave her chair and trip swiftly across the floor to the
newcomer.  They kissed each other, and, with arms around each other's
waists, they advanced toward him.  That must be her mother, he thought.
She was a tall, blond woman, slender, and stately, and beautiful.  Her
gown was what he might expect in such a house.  His eyes delighted in the
graceful lines of it.  She and her dress together reminded him of women
on the stage.  Then he remembered seeing similar grand ladies and gowns
entering the London theatres while he stood and watched and the policemen
shoved him back into the drizzle beyond the awning.  Next his mind leaped
to the Grand Hotel at Yokohama, where, too, from the sidewalk, he had
seen grand ladies.  Then the city and the harbor of Yokohama, in a
thousand pictures, began flashing before his eyes.  But he swiftly
dismissed the kaleidoscope of memory, oppressed by the urgent need of the
present.  He knew that he must stand up to be introduced, and he
struggled painfully to his feet, where he stood with trousers bagging at
the knees, his arms loose-hanging and ludicrous, his face set hard for
the impending ordeal.


