

CHAPTER II


The process of getting into the dining room was a nightmare to him.
Between halts and stumbles, jerks and lurches, locomotion had at times
seemed impossible.  But at last he had made it, and was seated alongside
of Her.  The array of knives and forks frightened him.  They bristled
with unknown perils, and he gazed at them, fascinated, till their dazzle
became a background across which moved a succession of forecastle
pictures, wherein he and his mates sat eating salt beef with
sheath-knives and fingers, or scooping thick pea-soup out of pannikins by
means of battered iron spoons.  The stench of bad beef was in his
nostrils, while in his ears, to the accompaniment of creaking timbers and
groaning bulkheads, echoed the loud mouth-noises of the eaters.  He
watched them eating, and decided that they ate like pigs.  Well, he would
be careful here.  He would make no noise.  He would keep his mind upon it
all the time.

He glanced around the table.  Opposite him was Arthur, and Arthur's
brother, Norman.  They were her brothers, he reminded himself, and his
heart warmed toward them.  How they loved each other, the members of this
family!  There flashed into his mind the picture of her mother, of the
kiss of greeting, and of the pair of them walking toward him with arms
entwined.  Not in his world were such displays of affection between
parents and children made.  It was a revelation of the heights of
existence that were attained in the world above.  It was the finest thing
yet that he had seen in this small glimpse of that world.  He was moved
deeply by appreciation of it, and his heart was melting with sympathetic
tenderness.  He had starved for love all his life.  His nature craved
love.  It was an organic demand of his being.  Yet he had gone without,
and hardened himself in the process.  He had not known that he needed
love.  Nor did he know it now.  He merely saw it in operation, and
thrilled to it, and thought it fine, and high, and splendid.

He was glad that Mr. Morse was not there.  It was difficult enough
getting acquainted with her, and her mother, and her brother, Norman.
Arthur he already knew somewhat.  The father would have been too much for
him, he felt sure.  It seemed to him that he had never worked so hard in
his life.  The severest toil was child's play compared with this.  Tiny
nodules of moisture stood out on his forehead, and his shirt was wet with
sweat from the exertion of doing so many unaccustomed things at once.  He
had to eat as he had never eaten before, to handle strange tools, to
glance surreptitiously about and learn how to accomplish each new thing,
to receive the flood of impressions that was pouring in upon him and
being mentally annotated and classified; to be conscious of a yearning
for her that perturbed him in the form of a dull, aching restlessness; to
feel the prod of desire to win to the walk in life whereon she trod, and
to have his mind ever and again straying off in speculation and vague
plans of how to reach to her.  Also, when his secret glance went across
to Norman opposite him, or to any one else, to ascertain just what knife
or fork was to be used in any particular occasion, that person's features
were seized upon by his mind, which automatically strove to appraise them
and to divine what they were--all in relation to her.  Then he had to
talk, to hear what was said to him and what was said back and forth, and
to answer, when it was necessary, with a tongue prone to looseness of
speech that required a constant curb.  And to add confusion to confusion,
there was the servant, an unceasing menace, that appeared noiselessly at
his shoulder, a dire Sphinx that propounded puzzles and conundrums
demanding instantaneous solution.  He was oppressed throughout the meal
by the thought of finger-bowls.  Irrelevantly, insistently, scores of
times, he wondered when they would come on and what they looked like.  He
had heard of such things, and now, sooner or later, somewhere in the next
few minutes, he would see them, sit at table with exalted beings who used
them--ay, and he would use them himself.  And most important of all, far
down and yet always at the surface of his thought, was the problem of how
he should comport himself toward these persons.  What should his attitude
be?  He wrestled continually and anxiously with the problem.  There were
cowardly suggestions that he should make believe, assume a part; and
there were still more cowardly suggestions that warned him he would fail
in such course, that his nature was not fitted to live up to it, and that
he would make a fool of himself.

It was during the first part of the dinner, struggling to decide upon his
attitude, that he was very quiet.  He did not know that his quietness was
giving the lie to Arthur's words of the day before, when that brother of
hers had announced that he was going to bring a wild man home to dinner
and for them not to be alarmed, because they would find him an
interesting wild man.  Martin Eden could not have found it in him, just
then, to believe that her brother could be guilty of such
treachery--especially when he had been the means of getting this
particular brother out of an unpleasant row.  So he sat at table,
perturbed by his own unfitness and at the same time charmed by all that
went on about him.  For the first time he realized that eating was
something more than a utilitarian function.  He was unaware of what he
ate.  It was merely food.  He was feasting his love of beauty at this
table where eating was an aesthetic function.  It was an intellectual
function, too.  His mind was stirred.  He heard words spoken that were
meaningless to him, and other words that he had seen only in books and
that no man or woman he had known was of large enough mental caliber to
pronounce.  When he heard such words dropping carelessly from the lips of
the members of this marvellous family, her family, he thrilled with
delight.  The romance, and beauty, and high vigor of the books were
coming true.  He was in that rare and blissful state wherein a man sees
his dreams stalk out from the crannies of fantasy and become fact.

Never had he been at such an altitude of living, and he kept himself in
the background, listening, observing, and pleasuring, replying in
reticent monosyllables, saying, "Yes, miss," and "No, miss," to her, and
"Yes, ma'am," and "No, ma'am," to her mother.  He curbed the impulse,
arising out of his sea-training, to say "Yes, sir," and "No, sir," to her
brothers.  He felt that it would be inappropriate and a confession of
inferiority on his part--which would never do if he was to win to her.
Also, it was a dictate of his pride.  "By God!" he cried to himself,
once; "I'm just as good as them, and if they do know lots that I don't, I
could learn 'm a few myself, all the same!"  And the next moment, when
she or her mother addressed him as "Mr. Eden," his aggressive pride was
forgotten, and he was glowing and warm with delight.  He was a civilized
man, that was what he was, shoulder to shoulder, at dinner, with people
he had read about in books.  He was in the books himself, adventuring
through the printed pages of bound volumes.

But while he belied Arthur's description, and appeared a gentle lamb
rather than a wild man, he was racking his brains for a course of action.
He was no gentle lamb, and the part of second fiddle would never do for
the high-pitched dominance of his nature.  He talked only when he had to,
and then his speech was like his walk to the table, filled with jerks and
halts as he groped in his polyglot vocabulary for words, debating over
words he knew were fit but which he feared he could not pronounce,
rejecting other words he knew would not be understood or would be raw and
harsh.  But all the time he was oppressed by the consciousness that this
carefulness of diction was making a booby of him, preventing him from
expressing what he had in him.  Also, his love of freedom chafed against
the restriction in much the same way his neck chafed against the starched
fetter of a collar.  Besides, he was confident that he could not keep it
up.  He was by nature powerful of thought and sensibility, and the
creative spirit was restive and urgent.  He was swiftly mastered by the
concept or sensation in him that struggled in birth-throes to receive
expression and form, and then he forgot himself and where he was, and the
old words--the tools of speech he knew--slipped out.

Once, he declined something from the servant who interrupted and pestered
at his shoulder, and he said, shortly and emphatically, "Pew!"

On the instant those at the table were keyed up and expectant, the
servant was smugly pleased, and he was wallowing in mortification.  But
he recovered himself quickly.

"It's the Kanaka for 'finish,'" he explained, "and it just come out
naturally.  It's spelt p-a-u."

He caught her curious and speculative eyes fixed on his hands, and, being
in explanatory mood, he said:-

"I just come down the Coast on one of the Pacific mail steamers.  She was
behind time, an' around the Puget Sound ports we worked like niggers,
storing cargo-mixed freight, if you know what that means.  That's how the
skin got knocked off."

"Oh, it wasn't that," she hastened to explain, in turn.  "Your hands
seemed too small for your body."

His cheeks were hot.  He took it as an exposure of another of his
deficiencies.

"Yes," he said depreciatingly.  "They ain't big enough to stand the
strain.  I can hit like a mule with my arms and shoulders.  They are too
strong, an' when I smash a man on the jaw the hands get smashed, too."

He was not happy at what he had said.  He was filled with disgust at
himself.  He had loosed the guard upon his tongue and talked about things
that were not nice.

"It was brave of you to help Arthur the way you did--and you a stranger,"
she said tactfully, aware of his discomfiture though not of the reason
for it.

He, in turn, realized what she had done, and in the consequent warm surge
of gratefulness that overwhelmed him forgot his loose-worded tongue.

"It wasn't nothin' at all," he said.  "Any guy 'ud do it for another.
That bunch of hoodlums was lookin' for trouble, an' Arthur wasn't
botherin' 'em none.  They butted in on 'm, an' then I butted in on them
an' poked a few.  That's where some of the skin off my hands went, along
with some of the teeth of the gang.  I wouldn't 'a' missed it for
anything.  When I seen--"

He paused, open-mouthed, on the verge of the pit of his own depravity and
utter worthlessness to breathe the same air she did.  And while Arthur
took up the tale, for the twentieth time, of his adventure with the
drunken hoodlums on the ferry-boat and of how Martin Eden had rushed in
and rescued him, that individual, with frowning brows, meditated upon the
fool he had made of himself, and wrestled more determinedly with the
problem of how he should conduct himself toward these people.  He
certainly had not succeeded so far.  He wasn't of their tribe, and he
couldn't talk their lingo, was the way he put it to himself.  He couldn't
fake being their kind.  The masquerade would fail, and besides,
masquerade was foreign to his nature.  There was no room in him for sham
or artifice.  Whatever happened, he must be real.  He couldn't talk their
talk just yet, though in time he would.  Upon that he was resolved.  But
in the meantime, talk he must, and it must be his own talk, toned down,
of course, so as to be comprehensible to them and so as not to shook them
too much.  And furthermore, he wouldn't claim, not even by tacit
acceptance, to be familiar with anything that was unfamiliar.  In
pursuance of this decision, when the two brothers, talking university
shop, had used "trig" several times, Martin Eden demanded:-

"What is _trig_?"

"Trignometry," Norman said; "a higher form of math."

"And what is math?" was the next question, which, somehow, brought the
laugh on Norman.

"Mathematics, arithmetic," was the answer.

Martin Eden nodded.  He had caught a glimpse of the apparently
illimitable vistas of knowledge.  What he saw took on tangibility.  His
abnormal power of vision made abstractions take on concrete form.  In the
alchemy of his brain, trigonometry and mathematics and the whole field of
knowledge which they betokened were transmuted into so much landscape.
The vistas he saw were vistas of green foliage and forest glades, all
softly luminous or shot through with flashing lights.  In the distance,
detail was veiled and blurred by a purple haze, but behind this purple
haze, he knew, was the glamour of the unknown, the lure of romance.  It
was like wine to him.  Here was adventure, something to do with head and
hand, a world to conquer--and straightway from the back of his
consciousness rushed the thought, _conquering, to win to her, that lily-
pale spirit sitting beside him_.

The glimmering vision was rent asunder and dissipated by Arthur, who, all
evening, had been trying to draw his wild man out.  Martin Eden
remembered his decision.  For the first time he became himself,
consciously and deliberately at first, but soon lost in the joy of
creating in making life as he knew it appear before his listeners' eyes.
He had been a member of the crew of the smuggling schooner Halcyon when
she was captured by a revenue cutter.  He saw with wide eyes, and he
could tell what he saw.  He brought the pulsing sea before them, and the
men and the ships upon the sea.  He communicated his power of vision,
till they saw with his eyes what he had seen.  He selected from the vast
mass of detail with an artist's touch, drawing pictures of life that
glowed and burned with light and color, injecting movement so that his
listeners surged along with him on the flood of rough eloquence,
enthusiasm, and power.  At times he shocked them with the vividness of
the narrative and his terms of speech, but beauty always followed fast
upon the heels of violence, and tragedy was relieved by humor, by
interpretations of the strange twists and quirks of sailors' minds.

And while he talked, the girl looked at him with startled eyes.  His fire
warmed her.  She wondered if she had been cold all her days.  She wanted
to lean toward this burning, blazing man that was like a volcano spouting
forth strength, robustness, and health.  She felt that she must lean
toward him, and resisted by an effort.  Then, too, there was the counter
impulse to shrink away from him.  She was repelled by those lacerated
hands, grimed by toil so that the very dirt of life was ingrained in the
flesh itself, by that red chafe of the collar and those bulging muscles.
His roughness frightened her; each roughness of speech was an insult to
her ear, each rough phase of his life an insult to her soul.  And ever
and again would come the draw of him, till she thought he must be evil to
have such power over her.  All that was most firmly established in her
mind was rocking.  His romance and adventure were battering at the
conventions.  Before his facile perils and ready laugh, life was no
longer an affair of serious effort and restraint, but a toy, to be played
with and turned topsy-turvy, carelessly to be lived and pleasured in, and
carelessly to be flung aside.  "Therefore, play!" was the cry that rang
through her.  "Lean toward him, if so you will, and place your two hands
upon his neck!"  She wanted to cry out at the recklessness of the
thought, and in vain she appraised her own cleanness and culture and
balanced all that she was against what he was not.  She glanced about her
and saw the others gazing at him with rapt attention; and she would have
despaired had not she seen horror in her mother's eyes--fascinated
horror, it was true, but none the less horror.  This man from outer
darkness was evil.  Her mother saw it, and her mother was right.  She
would trust her mother's judgment in this as she had always trusted it in
all things.  The fire of him was no longer warm, and the fear of him was
no longer poignant.

Later, at the piano, she played for him, and at him, aggressively, with
the vague intent of emphasizing the impassableness of the gulf that
separated them.  Her music was a club that she swung brutally upon his
head; and though it stunned him and crushed him down, it incited him.  He
gazed upon her in awe.  In his mind, as in her own, the gulf widened; but
faster than it widened, towered his ambition to win across it.  But he
was too complicated a plexus of sensibilities to sit staring at a gulf a
whole evening, especially when there was music.  He was remarkably
susceptible to music.  It was like strong drink, firing him to audacities
of feeling,--a drug that laid hold of his imagination and went
cloud-soaring through the sky.  It banished sordid fact, flooded his mind
with beauty, loosed romance and to its heels added wings.  He did not
understand the music she played.  It was different from the dance-hall
piano-banging and blatant brass bands he had heard.  But he had caught
hints of such music from the books, and he accepted her playing largely
on faith, patiently waiting, at first, for the lifting measures of
pronounced and simple rhythm, puzzled because those measures were not
long continued.  Just as he caught the swing of them and started, his
imagination attuned in flight, always they vanished away in a chaotic
scramble of sounds that was meaningless to him, and that dropped his
imagination, an inert weight, back to earth.

Once, it entered his mind that there was a deliberate rebuff in all this.
He caught her spirit of antagonism and strove to divine the message that
her hands pronounced upon the keys.  Then he dismissed the thought as
unworthy and impossible, and yielded himself more freely to the music.
The old delightful condition began to be induced.  His feet were no
longer clay, and his flesh became spirit; before his eyes and behind his
eyes shone a great glory; and then the scene before him vanished and he
was away, rocking over the world that was to him a very dear world.  The
known and the unknown were commingled in the dream-pageant that thronged
his vision.  He entered strange ports of sun-washed lands, and trod
market-places among barbaric peoples that no man had ever seen.  The
scent of the spice islands was in his nostrils as he had known it on
warm, breathless nights at sea, or he beat up against the southeast
trades through long tropic days, sinking palm-tufted coral islets in the
turquoise sea behind and lifting palm-tufted coral islets in the
turquoise sea ahead.  Swift as thought the pictures came and went.  One
instant he was astride a broncho and flying through the fairy-colored
Painted Desert country; the next instant he was gazing down through
shimmering heat into the whited sepulchre of Death Valley, or pulling an
oar on a freezing ocean where great ice islands towered and glistened in
the sun.  He lay on a coral beach where the cocoanuts grew down to the
mellow-sounding surf.  The hulk of an ancient wreck burned with blue
fires, in the light of which danced the hula dancers to the barbaric love-
calls of the singers, who chanted to tinkling ukuleles and rumbling tom-
toms.  It was a sensuous, tropic night.  In the background a volcano
crater was silhouetted against the stars.  Overhead drifted a pale
crescent moon, and the Southern Cross burned low in the sky.

He was a harp; all life that he had known and that was his consciousness
was the strings; and the flood of music was a wind that poured against
those strings and set them vibrating with memories and dreams.  He did
not merely feel.  Sensation invested itself in form and color and
radiance, and what his imagination dared, it objectified in some
sublimated and magic way.  Past, present, and future mingled; and he went
on oscillating across the broad, warm world, through high adventure and
noble deeds to Her--ay, and with her, winning her, his arm about her, and
carrying her on in flight through the empery of his mind.

And she, glancing at him across her shoulder, saw something of all this
in his face.  It was a transfigured face, with great shining eyes that
gazed beyond the veil of sound and saw behind it the leap and pulse of
life and the gigantic phantoms of the spirit.  She was startled.  The
raw, stumbling lout was gone.  The ill-fitting clothes, battered hands,
and sunburned face remained; but these seemed the prison-bars through
which she saw a great soul looking forth, inarticulate and dumb because
of those feeble lips that would not give it speech.  Only for a flashing
moment did she see this, then she saw the lout returned, and she laughed
at the whim of her fancy.  But the impression of that fleeting glimpse
lingered, and when the time came for him to beat a stumbling retreat and
go, she lent him the volume of Swinburne, and another of Browning--she
was studying Browning in one of her English courses.  He seemed such a
boy, as he stood blushing and stammering his thanks, that a wave of pity,
maternal in its prompting, welled up in her.  She did not remember the
lout, nor the imprisoned soul, nor the man who had stared at her in all
masculineness and delighted and frightened her.  She saw before her only
a boy, who was shaking her hand with a hand so calloused that it felt
like a nutmeg-grater and rasped her skin, and who was saying jerkily:-

"The greatest time of my life.  You see, I ain't used to things. . . "  He
looked about him helplessly.  "To people and houses like this.  It's all
new to me, and I like it."

"I hope you'll call again," she said, as he was saying good night to her
brothers.

He pulled on his cap, lurched desperately through the doorway, and was
gone.

"Well, what do you think of him?" Arthur demanded.

"He is most interesting, a whiff of ozone," she answered.  "How old is
he?"

"Twenty--almost twenty-one.  I asked him this afternoon.  I didn't think
he was that young."

And I am three years older, was the thought in her mind as she kissed her
brothers goodnight.


