

CHAPTER III


As Martin Eden went down the steps, his hand dropped into his coat
pocket.  It came out with a brown rice paper and a pinch of Mexican
tobacco, which were deftly rolled together into a cigarette.  He drew the
first whiff of smoke deep into his lungs and expelled it in a long and
lingering exhalation.  "By God!" he said aloud, in a voice of awe and
wonder.  "By God!" he repeated.  And yet again he murmured, "By God!"
Then his hand went to his collar, which he ripped out of the shirt and
stuffed into his pocket.  A cold drizzle was falling, but he bared his
head to it and unbuttoned his vest, swinging along in splendid unconcern.
He was only dimly aware that it was raining.  He was in an ecstasy,
dreaming dreams and reconstructing the scenes just past.

He had met the woman at last--the woman that he had thought little about,
not being given to thinking about women, but whom he had expected, in a
remote way, he would sometime meet.  He had sat next to her at table.  He
had felt her hand in his, he had looked into her eyes and caught a vision
of a beautiful spirit;--but no more beautiful than the eyes through which
it shone, nor than the flesh that gave it expression and form.  He did
not think of her flesh as flesh,--which was new to him; for of the women
he had known that was the only way he thought.  Her flesh was somehow
different.  He did not conceive of her body as a body, subject to the
ills and frailties of bodies.  Her body was more than the garb of her
spirit.  It was an emanation of her spirit, a pure and gracious
crystallization of her divine essence.  This feeling of the divine
startled him.  It shocked him from his dreams to sober thought.  No word,
no clew, no hint, of the divine had ever reached him before.  He had
never believed in the divine.  He had always been irreligious, scoffing
good-naturedly at the sky-pilots and their immortality of the soul.  There
was no life beyond, he had contended; it was here and now, then darkness
everlasting.  But what he had seen in her eyes was soul--immortal soul
that could never die.  No man he had known, nor any woman, had given him
the message of immortality.  But she had.  She had whispered it to him
the first moment she looked at him.  Her face shimmered before his eyes
as he walked along,--pale and serious, sweet and sensitive, smiling with
pity and tenderness as only a spirit could smile, and pure as he had
never dreamed purity could be.  Her purity smote him like a blow.  It
startled him.  He had known good and bad; but purity, as an attribute of
existence, had never entered his mind.  And now, in her, he conceived
purity to be the superlative of goodness and of cleanness, the sum of
which constituted eternal life.

And promptly urged his ambition to grasp at eternal life.  He was not fit
to carry water for her--he knew that; it was a miracle of luck and a
fantastic stroke that had enabled him to see her and be with her and talk
with her that night.  It was accidental.  There was no merit in it.  He
did not deserve such fortune.  His mood was essentially religious.  He
was humble and meek, filled with self-disparagement and abasement.  In
such frame of mind sinners come to the penitent form.  He was convicted
of sin.  But as the meek and lowly at the penitent form catch splendid
glimpses of their future lordly existence, so did he catch similar
glimpses of the state he would gain to by possessing her.  But this
possession of her was dim and nebulous and totally different from
possession as he had known it.  Ambition soared on mad wings, and he saw
himself climbing the heights with her, sharing thoughts with her,
pleasuring in beautiful and noble things with her.  It was a
soul-possession he dreamed, refined beyond any grossness, a free
comradeship of spirit that he could not put into definite thought.  He
did not think it.  For that matter, he did not think at all.  Sensation
usurped reason, and he was quivering and palpitant with emotions he had
never known, drifting deliciously on a sea of sensibility where feeling
itself was exalted and spiritualized and carried beyond the summits of
life.

He staggered along like a drunken man, murmuring fervently aloud: "By
God!  By God!"

A policeman on a street corner eyed him suspiciously, then noted his
sailor roll.

"Where did you get it?" the policeman demanded.

Martin Eden came back to earth.  His was a fluid organism, swiftly
adjustable, capable of flowing into and filling all sorts of nooks and
crannies.  With the policeman's hail he was immediately his ordinary
self, grasping the situation clearly.

"It's a beaut, ain't it?" he laughed back.  "I didn't know I was talkin'
out loud."

"You'll be singing next," was the policeman's diagnosis.

"No, I won't.  Gimme a match an' I'll catch the next car home."

He lighted his cigarette, said good night, and went on.  "Now wouldn't
that rattle you?" he ejaculated under his breath.  "That copper thought I
was drunk."  He smiled to himself and meditated.  "I guess I was," he
added; "but I didn't think a woman's face'd do it."

He caught a Telegraph Avenue car that was going to Berkeley.  It was
crowded with youths and young men who were singing songs and ever and
again barking out college yells.  He studied them curiously.  They were
university boys.  They went to the same university that she did, were in
her class socially, could know her, could see her every day if they
wanted to.  He wondered that they did not want to, that they had been out
having a good time instead of being with her that evening, talking with
her, sitting around her in a worshipful and adoring circle.  His thoughts
wandered on.  He noticed one with narrow-slitted eyes and a loose-lipped
mouth.  That fellow was vicious, he decided.  On shipboard he would be a
sneak, a whiner, a tattler.  He, Martin Eden, was a better man than that
fellow.  The thought cheered him.  It seemed to draw him nearer to Her.
He began comparing himself with the students.  He grew conscious of the
muscled mechanism of his body and felt confident that he was physically
their master.  But their heads were filled with knowledge that enabled
them to talk her talk,--the thought depressed him.  But what was a brain
for? he demanded passionately.  What they had done, he could do.  They
had been studying about life from the books while he had been busy living
life.  His brain was just as full of knowledge as theirs, though it was a
different kind of knowledge.  How many of them could tie a lanyard knot,
or take a wheel or a lookout?  His life spread out before him in a series
of pictures of danger and daring, hardship and toil.  He remembered his
failures and scrapes in the process of learning.  He was that much to the
good, anyway.  Later on they would have to begin living life and going
through the mill as he had gone.  Very well.  While they were busy with
that, he could be learning the other side of life from the books.

As the car crossed the zone of scattered dwellings that separated Oakland
from Berkeley, he kept a lookout for a familiar, two-story building along
the front of which ran the proud sign, HIGGINBOTHAM'S CASH STORE.  Martin
Eden got off at this corner.  He stared up for a moment at the sign.  It
carried a message to him beyond its mere wording.  A personality of
smallness and egotism and petty underhandedness seemed to emanate from
the letters themselves.  Bernard Higginbotham had married his sister, and
he knew him well.  He let himself in with a latch-key and climbed the
stairs to the second floor.  Here lived his brother-in-law.  The grocery
was below.  There was a smell of stale vegetables in the air.  As he
groped his way across the hall he stumbled over a toy-cart, left there by
one of his numerous nephews and nieces, and brought up against a door
with a resounding bang.  "The pincher," was his thought; "too miserly to
burn two cents' worth of gas and save his boarders' necks."

He fumbled for the knob and entered a lighted room, where sat his sister
and Bernard Higginbotham.  She was patching a pair of his trousers, while
his lean body was distributed over two chairs, his feet dangling in
dilapidated carpet-slippers over the edge of the second chair.  He
glanced across the top of the paper he was reading, showing a pair of
dark, insincere, sharp-staring eyes.  Martin Eden never looked at him
without experiencing a sense of repulsion.  What his sister had seen in
the man was beyond him.  The other affected him as so much vermin, and
always aroused in him an impulse to crush him under his foot.  "Some day
I'll beat the face off of him," was the way he often consoled himself for
enduring the man's existence.  The eyes, weasel-like and cruel, were
looking at him complainingly.

"Well," Martin demanded.  "Out with it."

"I had that door painted only last week," Mr. Higginbotham half whined,
half bullied; "and you know what union wages are.  You should be more
careful."

Martin had intended to reply, but he was struck by the hopelessness of
it.  He gazed across the monstrous sordidness of soul to a chromo on the
wall.  It surprised him.  He had always liked it, but it seemed that now
he was seeing it for the first time.  It was cheap, that was what it was,
like everything else in this house.  His mind went back to the house he
had just left, and he saw, first, the paintings, and next, Her, looking
at him with melting sweetness as she shook his hand at leaving.  He
forgot where he was and Bernard Higginbotham's existence, till that
gentleman demanded:-

"Seen a ghost?"

Martin came back and looked at the beady eyes, sneering, truculent,
cowardly, and there leaped into his vision, as on a screen, the same eyes
when their owner was making a sale in the store below--subservient eyes,
smug, and oily, and flattering.

"Yes," Martin answered.  "I seen a ghost.  Good night.  Good night,
Gertrude."

He started to leave the room, tripping over a loose seam in the
slatternly carpet.

"Don't bang the door," Mr. Higginbotham cautioned him.

He felt the blood crawl in his veins, but controlled himself and closed
the door softly behind him.

Mr. Higginbotham looked at his wife exultantly.

"He's ben drinkin'," he proclaimed in a hoarse whisper.  "I told you he
would."

She nodded her head resignedly.

"His eyes was pretty shiny," she confessed; "and he didn't have no
collar, though he went away with one.  But mebbe he didn't have more'n a
couple of glasses."

"He couldn't stand up straight," asserted her husband.  "I watched him.
He couldn't walk across the floor without stumblin'.  You heard 'm
yourself almost fall down in the hall."

"I think it was over Alice's cart," she said.  "He couldn't see it in the
dark."

Mr. Higginbotham's voice and wrath began to rise.  All day he effaced
himself in the store, reserving for the evening, with his family, the
privilege of being himself.

"I tell you that precious brother of yours was drunk."

His voice was cold, sharp, and final, his lips stamping the enunciation
of each word like the die of a machine.  His wife sighed and remained
silent.  She was a large, stout woman, always dressed slatternly and
always tired from the burdens of her flesh, her work, and her husband.

"He's got it in him, I tell you, from his father," Mr. Higginbotham went
on accusingly.  "An' he'll croak in the gutter the same way.  You know
that."

She nodded, sighed, and went on stitching.  They were agreed that Martin
had come home drunk.  They did not have it in their souls to know beauty,
or they would have known that those shining eyes and that glowing face
betokened youth's first vision of love.

"Settin' a fine example to the children," Mr. Higginbotham snorted,
suddenly, in the silence for which his wife was responsible and which he
resented.  Sometimes he almost wished she would oppose him more.  "If he
does it again, he's got to get out.  Understand!  I won't put up with his
shinanigan--debotchin' innocent children with his boozing."  Mr.
Higginbotham liked the word, which was a new one in his vocabulary,
recently gleaned from a newspaper column.  "That's what it is,
debotchin'--there ain't no other name for it."

Still his wife sighed, shook her head sorrowfully, and stitched on.  Mr.
Higginbotham resumed the newspaper.

"Has he paid last week's board?" he shot across the top of the newspaper.

She nodded, then added, "He still has some money."

"When is he goin' to sea again?"

"When his pay-day's spent, I guess," she answered.  "He was over to San
Francisco yesterday looking for a ship.  But he's got money, yet, an'
he's particular about the kind of ship he signs for."

"It's not for a deck-swab like him to put on airs," Mr. Higginbotham
snorted.  "Particular!  Him!"

"He said something about a schooner that's gettin' ready to go off to
some outlandish place to look for buried treasure, that he'd sail on her
if his money held out."

"If he only wanted to steady down, I'd give him a job drivin' the wagon,"
her husband said, but with no trace of benevolence in his voice.  "Tom's
quit."

His wife looked alarm and interrogation.

"Quit to-night.  Is goin' to work for Carruthers.  They paid 'm more'n I
could afford."

"I told you you'd lose 'm," she cried out.  "He was worth more'n you was
giving him."

"Now look here, old woman," Higginbotham bullied, "for the thousandth
time I've told you to keep your nose out of the business.  I won't tell
you again."

"I don't care," she sniffled.  "Tom was a good boy."  Her husband glared
at her.  This was unqualified defiance.

"If that brother of yours was worth his salt, he could take the wagon,"
he snorted.

"He pays his board, just the same," was the retort.  "An' he's my
brother, an' so long as he don't owe you money you've got no right to be
jumping on him all the time.  I've got some feelings, if I have been
married to you for seven years."

"Did you tell 'm you'd charge him for gas if he goes on readin' in bed?"
he demanded.

Mrs. Higginbotham made no reply.  Her revolt faded away, her spirit
wilting down into her tired flesh.  Her husband was triumphant.  He had
her.  His eyes snapped vindictively, while his ears joyed in the sniffles
she emitted.  He extracted great happiness from squelching her, and she
squelched easily these days, though it had been different in the first
years of their married life, before the brood of children and his
incessant nagging had sapped her energy.

"Well, you tell 'm to-morrow, that's all," he said.  "An' I just want to
tell you, before I forget it, that you'd better send for Marian to-morrow
to take care of the children.  With Tom quit, I'll have to be out on the
wagon, an' you can make up your mind to it to be down below waitin' on
the counter."

"But to-morrow's wash day," she objected weakly.

"Get up early, then, an' do it first.  I won't start out till ten
o'clock."

He crinkled the paper viciously and resumed his reading.


