

CHAPTER IV


Martin Eden, with blood still crawling from contact with his brother-in-
law, felt his way along the unlighted back hall and entered his room, a
tiny cubbyhole with space for a bed, a wash-stand, and one chair.  Mr.
Higginbotham was too thrifty to keep a servant when his wife could do the
work.  Besides, the servant's room enabled them to take in two boarders
instead of one.  Martin placed the Swinburne and Browning on the chair,
took off his coat, and sat down on the bed.  A screeching of asthmatic
springs greeted the weight of his body, but he did not notice them.  He
started to take off his shoes, but fell to staring at the white plaster
wall opposite him, broken by long streaks of dirty brown where rain had
leaked through the roof.  On this befouled background visions began to
flow and burn.  He forgot his shoes and stared long, till his lips began
to move and he murmured, "Ruth."

"Ruth."  He had not thought a simple sound could be so beautiful.  It
delighted his ear, and he grew intoxicated with the repetition of it.
"Ruth."  It was a talisman, a magic word to conjure with.  Each time he
murmured it, her face shimmered before him, suffusing the foul wall with
a golden radiance.  This radiance did not stop at the wall.  It extended
on into infinity, and through its golden depths his soul went questing
after hers.  The best that was in him was out in splendid flood.  The
very thought of her ennobled and purified him, made him better, and made
him want to be better.  This was new to him.  He had never known women
who had made him better.  They had always had the counter effect of
making him beastly.  He did not know that many of them had done their
best, bad as it was.  Never having been conscious of himself, he did not
know that he had that in his being that drew love from women and which
had been the cause of their reaching out for his youth.  Though they had
often bothered him, he had never bothered about them; and he would never
have dreamed that there were women who had been better because of him.
Always in sublime carelessness had he lived, till now, and now it seemed
to him that they had always reached out and dragged at him with vile
hands.  This was not just to them, nor to himself.  But he, who for the
first time was becoming conscious of himself, was in no condition to
judge, and he burned with shame as he stared at the vision of his infamy.

He got up abruptly and tried to see himself in the dirty looking-glass
over the wash-stand.  He passed a towel over it and looked again, long
and carefully.  It was the first time he had ever really seen himself.
His eyes were made for seeing, but up to that moment they had been filled
with the ever changing panorama of the world, at which he had been too
busy gazing, ever to gaze at himself.  He saw the head and face of a
young fellow of twenty, but, being unused to such appraisement, he did
not know how to value it.  Above a square-domed forehead he saw a mop of
brown hair, nut-brown, with a wave to it and hints of curls that were a
delight to any woman, making hands tingle to stroke it and fingers tingle
to pass caresses through it.  But he passed it by as without merit, in
Her eyes, and dwelt long and thoughtfully on the high, square
forehead,--striving to penetrate it and learn the quality of its content.
What kind of a brain lay behind there? was his insistent interrogation.
What was it capable of?  How far would it take him?  Would it take him to
her?

He wondered if there was soul in those steel-gray eyes that were often
quite blue of color and that were strong with the briny airs of the sun-
washed deep.  He wondered, also, how his eyes looked to her.  He tried to
imagine himself she, gazing into those eyes of his, but failed in the
jugglery.  He could successfully put himself inside other men's minds,
but they had to be men whose ways of life he knew.  He did not know her
way of life.  She was wonder and mystery, and how could he guess one
thought of hers?  Well, they were honest eyes, he concluded, and in them
was neither smallness nor meanness.  The brown sunburn of his face
surprised him.  He had not dreamed he was so black.  He rolled up his
shirt-sleeve and compared the white underside if the arm with his face.
Yes, he was a white man, after all.  But the arms were sunburned, too.  He
twisted his arm, rolled the biceps over with his other hand, and gazed
underneath where he was least touched by the sun.  It was very white.  He
laughed at his bronzed face in the glass at the thought that it was once
as white as the underside of his arm; nor did he dream that in the world
there were few pale spirits of women who could boast fairer or smoother
skins than he--fairer than where he had escaped the ravages of the sun.

His might have been a cherub's mouth, had not the full, sensuous lips a
trick, under stress, of drawing firmly across the teeth.  At times, so
tightly did they draw, the mouth became stern and harsh, even ascetic.
They were the lips of a fighter and of a lover.  They could taste the
sweetness of life with relish, and they could put the sweetness aside and
command life.  The chin and jaw, strong and just hinting of square
aggressiveness, helped the lips to command life.  Strength balanced
sensuousness and had upon it a tonic effect, compelling him to love
beauty that was healthy and making him vibrate to sensations that were
wholesome.  And between the lips were teeth that had never known nor
needed the dentist's care.  They were white and strong and regular, he
decided, as he looked at them.  But as he looked, he began to be
troubled.  Somewhere, stored away in the recesses of his mind and vaguely
remembered, was the impression that there were people who washed their
teeth every day.  They were the people from up above--people in her
class.  She must wash her teeth every day, too.  What would she think if
she learned that he had never washed his teeth in all the days of his
life?  He resolved to get a tooth-brush and form the habit.  He would
begin at once, to-morrow.  It was not by mere achievement that he could
hope to win to her.  He must make a personal reform in all things, even
to tooth-washing and neck-gear, though a starched collar affected him as
a renunciation of freedom.

He held up his hand, rubbing the ball of the thumb over the calloused
palm and gazing at the dirt that was ingrained in the flesh itself and
which no brush could scrub away.  How different was her palm!  He
thrilled deliciously at the remembrance.  Like a rose-petal, he thought;
cool and soft as a snowflake.  He had never thought that a mere woman's
hand could be so sweetly soft.  He caught himself imagining the wonder of
a caress from such a hand, and flushed guiltily.  It was too gross a
thought for her.  In ways it seemed to impugn her high spirituality.  She
was a pale, slender spirit, exalted far beyond the flesh; but
nevertheless the softness of her palm persisted in his thoughts.  He was
used to the harsh callousness of factory girls and working women.  Well
he knew why their hands were rough; but this hand of hers . . . It was
soft because she had never used it to work with.  The gulf yawned between
her and him at the awesome thought of a person who did not have to work
for a living.  He suddenly saw the aristocracy of the people who did not
labor.  It towered before him on the wall, a figure in brass, arrogant
and powerful.  He had worked himself; his first memories seemed connected
with work, and all his family had worked.  There was Gertrude.  When her
hands were not hard from the endless housework, they were swollen and red
like boiled beef, what of the washing.  And there was his sister Marian.
She had worked in the cannery the preceding summer, and her slim, pretty
hands were all scarred with the tomato-knives.  Besides, the tips of two
of her fingers had been left in the cutting machine at the paper-box
factory the preceding winter.  He remembered the hard palms of his mother
as she lay in her coffin.  And his father had worked to the last fading
gasp; the horned growth on his hands must have been half an inch thick
when he died.  But Her hands were soft, and her mother's hands, and her
brothers'.  This last came to him as a surprise; it was tremendously
indicative of the highness of their caste, of the enormous distance that
stretched between her and him.

He sat back on the bed with a bitter laugh, and finished taking off his
shoes.  He was a fool; he had been made drunken by a woman's face and by
a woman's soft, white hands.  And then, suddenly, before his eyes, on the
foul plaster-wall appeared a vision.  He stood in front of a gloomy
tenement house.  It was night-time, in the East End of London, and before
him stood Margey, a little factory girl of fifteen.  He had seen her home
after the bean-feast.  She lived in that gloomy tenement, a place not fit
for swine.  His hand was going out to hers as he said good night.  She
had put her lips up to be kissed, but he wasn't going to kiss her.
Somehow he was afraid of her.  And then her hand closed on his and
pressed feverishly.  He felt her callouses grind and grate on his, and a
great wave of pity welled over him.  He saw her yearning, hungry eyes,
and her ill-fed female form which had been rushed from childhood into a
frightened and ferocious maturity; then he put his arms about her in
large tolerance and stooped and kissed her on the lips.  Her glad little
cry rang in his ears, and he felt her clinging to him like a cat.  Poor
little starveling!  He continued to stare at the vision of what had
happened in the long ago.  His flesh was crawling as it had crawled that
night when she clung to him, and his heart was warm with pity.  It was a
gray scene, greasy gray, and the rain drizzled greasily on the pavement
stones.  And then a radiant glory shone on the wall, and up through the
other vision, displacing it, glimmered Her pale face under its crown of
golden hair, remote and inaccessible as a star.

He took the Browning and the Swinburne from the chair and kissed them.
Just the same, she told me to call again, he thought.  He took another
look at himself in the glass, and said aloud, with great solemnity:-

"Martin Eden, the first thing to-morrow you go to the free library an'
read up on etiquette.  Understand!"

He turned off the gas, and the springs shrieked under his body.

"But you've got to quit cussin', Martin, old boy; you've got to quit
cussin'," he said aloud.

Then he dozed off to sleep and to dream dreams that for madness and
audacity rivalled those of poppy-eaters.


