

CHAPTER V


He awoke next morning from rosy scenes of dream to a steamy atmosphere
that smelled of soapsuds and dirty clothes, and that was vibrant with the
jar and jangle of tormented life.  As he came out of his room he heard
the slosh of water, a sharp exclamation, and a resounding smack as his
sister visited her irritation upon one of her numerous progeny.  The
squall of the child went through him like a knife.  He was aware that the
whole thing, the very air he breathed, was repulsive and mean.  How
different, he thought, from the atmosphere of beauty and repose of the
house wherein Ruth dwelt.  There it was all spiritual.  Here it was all
material, and meanly material.

"Come here, Alfred," he called to the crying child, at the same time
thrusting his hand into his trousers pocket, where he carried his money
loose in the same large way that he lived life in general.  He put a
quarter in the youngster's hand and held him in his arms a moment,
soothing his sobs.  "Now run along and get some candy, and don't forget
to give some to your brothers and sisters.  Be sure and get the kind that
lasts longest."

His sister lifted a flushed face from the wash-tub and looked at him.

"A nickel'd ha' ben enough," she said.  "It's just like you, no idea of
the value of money.  The child'll eat himself sick."

"That's all right, sis," he answered jovially.  "My money'll take care of
itself.  If you weren't so busy, I'd kiss you good morning."

He wanted to be affectionate to this sister, who was good, and who, in
her way, he knew, loved him.  But, somehow, she grew less herself as the
years went by, and more and more baffling.  It was the hard work, the
many children, and the nagging of her husband, he decided, that had
changed her.  It came to him, in a flash of fancy, that her nature seemed
taking on the attributes of stale vegetables, smelly soapsuds, and of the
greasy dimes, nickels, and quarters she took in over the counter of the
store.

"Go along an' get your breakfast," she said roughly, though secretly
pleased.  Of all her wandering brood of brothers he had always been her
favorite.  "I declare I _will_ kiss you," she said, with a sudden stir at
her heart.

With thumb and forefinger she swept the dripping suds first from one arm
and then from the other.  He put his arms round her massive waist and
kissed her wet steamy lips. The tears welled into her eyes--not so much
from strength of feeling as from the weakness of chronic overwork.  She
shoved him away from her, but not before he caught a glimpse of her moist
eyes.

"You'll find breakfast in the oven," she said hurriedly.  "Jim ought to
be up now.  I had to get up early for the washing.  Now get along with
you and get out of the house early.  It won't be nice to-day, what of Tom
quittin' an' nobody but Bernard to drive the wagon."

Martin went into the kitchen with a sinking heart, the image of her red
face and slatternly form eating its way like acid into his brain.  She
might love him if she only had some time, he concluded.  But she was
worked to death.  Bernard Higginbotham was a brute to work her so hard.
But he could not help but feel, on the other hand, that there had not
been anything beautiful in that kiss.  It was true, it was an unusual
kiss.  For years she had kissed him only when he returned from voyages or
departed on voyages. But this kiss had tasted soapsuds, and the lips, he
had noticed, were flabby.  There had been no quick, vigorous lip-pressure
such as should accompany any kiss.  Hers was the kiss of a tired woman
who had been tired so long that she had forgotten how to kiss.  He
remembered her as a girl, before her marriage, when she would dance with
the best, all night, after a hard day's work at the laundry, and think
nothing of leaving the dance to go to another day's hard work.  And then
he thought of Ruth and the cool sweetness that must reside in her lips as
it resided in all about her.  Her kiss would be like her hand-shake or
the way she looked at one, firm and frank.  In imagination he dared to
think of her lips on his, and so vividly did he imagine that he went
dizzy at the thought and seemed to rift through clouds of rose-petals,
filling his brain with their perfume.

In the kitchen he found Jim, the other boarder, eating mush very
languidly, with a sick, far-away look in his eyes.  Jim was a plumber's
apprentice whose weak chin and hedonistic temperament, coupled with a
certain nervous stupidity, promised to take him nowhere in the race for
bread and butter.

"Why don't you eat?" he demanded, as Martin dipped dolefully into the
cold, half-cooked oatmeal mush.  "Was you drunk again last night?"

Martin shook his head.  He was oppressed by the utter squalidness of it
all.  Ruth Morse seemed farther removed than ever.

"I was," Jim went on with a boastful, nervous giggle.  "I was loaded
right to the neck.  Oh, she was a daisy.  Billy brought me home."

Martin nodded that he heard,--it was a habit of nature with him to pay
heed to whoever talked to him,--and poured a cup of lukewarm coffee.

"Goin' to the Lotus Club dance to-night?" Jim demanded.  "They're goin'
to have beer, an' if that Temescal bunch comes, there'll be a
rough-house.  I don't care, though.  I'm takin' my lady friend just the
same.  Cripes, but I've got a taste in my mouth!"

He made a wry face and attempted to wash the taste away with coffee.

"D'ye know Julia?"

Martin shook his head.

"She's my lady friend," Jim explained, "and she's a peach.  I'd introduce
you to her, only you'd win her.  I don't see what the girls see in you,
honest I don't; but the way you win them away from the fellers is
sickenin'."

"I never got any away from you," Martin answered uninterestedly.  The
breakfast had to be got through somehow.

"Yes, you did, too," the other asserted warmly.  "There was Maggie."

"Never had anything to do with her.  Never danced with her except that
one night."

"Yes, an' that's just what did it," Jim cried out.  "You just danced with
her an' looked at her, an' it was all off.  Of course you didn't mean
nothin' by it, but it settled me for keeps.  Wouldn't look at me again.
Always askin' about you.  She'd have made fast dates enough with you if
you'd wanted to."

"But I didn't want to."

"Wasn't necessary.  I was left at the pole."  Jim looked at him
admiringly.  "How d'ye do it, anyway, Mart?"

"By not carin' about 'em," was the answer.

"You mean makin' b'lieve you don't care about them?" Jim queried eagerly.

Martin considered for a moment, then answered, "Perhaps that will do, but
with me I guess it's different.  I never have cared--much.  If you can
put it on, it's all right, most likely."

"You should 'a' ben up at Riley's barn last night," Jim announced
inconsequently.  "A lot of the fellers put on the gloves.  There was a
peach from West Oakland.  They called 'm 'The Rat.'  Slick as silk.  No
one could touch 'm.  We was all wishin' you was there.  Where was you
anyway?"

"Down in Oakland," Martin replied.

"To the show?"

Martin shoved his plate away and got up.

"Comin' to the dance to-night?" the other called after him.

"No, I think not," he answered.

He went downstairs and out into the street, breathing great breaths of
air.  He had been suffocating in that atmosphere, while the apprentice's
chatter had driven him frantic.  There had been times when it was all he
could do to refrain from reaching over and mopping Jim's face in the mush-
plate.  The more he had chattered, the more remote had Ruth seemed to
him.  How could he, herding with such cattle, ever become worthy of her?
He was appalled at the problem confronting him, weighted down by the
incubus of his working-class station.  Everything reached out to hold him
down--his sister, his sister's house and family, Jim the apprentice,
everybody he knew, every tie of life.  Existence did not taste good in
his mouth.  Up to then he had accepted existence, as he had lived it with
all about him, as a good thing.  He had never questioned it, except when
he read books; but then, they were only books, fairy stories of a fairer
and impossible world.  But now he had seen that world, possible and real,
with a flower of a woman called Ruth in the midmost centre of it; and
thenceforth he must know bitter tastes, and longings sharp as pain, and
hopelessness that tantalized because it fed on hope.

He had debated between the Berkeley Free Library and the Oakland Free
Library, and decided upon the latter because Ruth lived in Oakland.  Who
could tell?--a library was a most likely place for her, and he might see
her there.  He did not know the way of libraries, and he wandered through
endless rows of fiction, till the delicate-featured French-looking girl
who seemed in charge, told him that the reference department was
upstairs.  He did not know enough to ask the man at the desk, and began
his adventures in the philosophy alcove.  He had heard of book
philosophy, but had not imagined there had been so much written about it.
The high, bulging shelves of heavy tomes humbled him and at the same time
stimulated him.  Here was work for the vigor of his brain.  He found
books on trigonometry in the mathematics section, and ran the pages, and
stared at the meaningless formulas and figures.  He could read English,
but he saw there an alien speech.  Norman and Arthur knew that speech.  He
had heard them talking it.  And they were her brothers.  He left the
alcove in despair.  From every side the books seemed to press upon him
and crush him.

He had never dreamed that the fund of human knowledge bulked so big.  He
was frightened.  How could his brain ever master it all?  Later, he
remembered that there were other men, many men, who had mastered it; and
he breathed a great oath, passionately, under his breath, swearing that
his brain could do what theirs had done.

And so he wandered on, alternating between depression and elation as he
stared at the shelves packed with wisdom.  In one miscellaneous section
he came upon a "Norrie's Epitome."  He turned the pages reverently.  In a
way, it spoke a kindred speech.  Both he and it were of the sea.  Then he
found a "Bowditch" and books by Lecky and Marshall.  There it was; he
would teach himself navigation.  He would quit drinking, work up, and
become a captain.  Ruth seemed very near to him in that moment.  As a
captain, he could marry her (if she would have him).  And if she
wouldn't, well--he would live a good life among men, because of Her, and
he would quit drinking anyway.  Then he remembered the underwriters and
the owners, the two masters a captain must serve, either of which could
and would break him and whose interests were diametrically opposed.  He
cast his eyes about the room and closed the lids down on a vision of ten
thousand books.  No; no more of the sea for him.  There was power in all
that wealth of books, and if he would do great things, he must do them on
the land.  Besides, captains were not allowed to take their wives to sea
with them.

Noon came, and afternoon.  He forgot to eat, and sought on for the books
on etiquette; for, in addition to career, his mind was vexed by a simple
and very concrete problem: _When you meet a young lady and she asks you
to call, how soon can you call_? was the way he worded it to himself.  But
when he found the right shelf, he sought vainly for the answer.  He was
appalled at the vast edifice of etiquette, and lost himself in the mazes
of visiting-card conduct between persons in polite society.  He abandoned
his search.  He had not found what he wanted, though he had found that it
would take all of a man's time to be polite, and that he would have to
live a preliminary life in which to learn how to be polite.

"Did you find what you wanted?" the man at the desk asked him as he was
leaving.

"Yes, sir," he answered.  "You have a fine library here."

The man nodded.  "We should be glad to see you here often.  Are you a
sailor?"

"Yes, sir," he answered.  "And I'll come again."

Now, how did he know that? he asked himself as he went down the stairs.

And for the first block along the street he walked very stiff and
straight and awkwardly, until he forgot himself in his thoughts,
whereupon his rolling gait gracefully returned to him.


