

CHAPTER VI


A terrible restlessness that was akin to hunger afflicted Martin Eden.  He
was famished for a sight of the girl whose slender hands had gripped his
life with a giant's grasp.  He could not steel himself to call upon her.
He was afraid that he might call too soon, and so be guilty of an awful
breach of that awful thing called etiquette.  He spent long hours in the
Oakland and Berkeley libraries, and made out application blanks for
membership for himself, his sisters Gertrude and Marian, and Jim, the
latter's consent being obtained at the expense of several glasses of
beer.  With four cards permitting him to draw books, he burned the gas
late in the servant's room, and was charged fifty cents a week for it by
Mr. Higginbotham.

The many books he read but served to whet his unrest.  Every page of
every book was a peep-hole into the realm of knowledge.  His hunger fed
upon what he read, and increased.  Also, he did not know where to begin,
and continually suffered from lack of preparation.  The commonest
references, that he could see plainly every reader was expected to know,
he did not know.  And the same was true of the poetry he read which
maddened him with delight.  He read more of Swinburne than was contained
in the volume Ruth had lent him; and "Dolores" he understood thoroughly.
But surely Ruth did not understand it, he concluded.  How could she,
living the refined life she did?  Then he chanced upon Kipling's poems,
and was swept away by the lilt and swing and glamour with which familiar
things had been invested.  He was amazed at the man's sympathy with life
and at his incisive psychology.  Psychology was a new word in Martin's
vocabulary.  He had bought a dictionary, which deed had decreased his
supply of money and brought nearer the day on which he must sail in
search of more.  Also, it incensed Mr. Higginbotham, who would have
preferred the money taking the form of board.

He dared not go near Ruth's neighborhood in the daytime, but night found
him lurking like a thief around the Morse home, stealing glimpses at the
windows and loving the very walls that sheltered her.  Several times he
barely escaped being caught by her brothers, and once he trailed Mr.
Morse down town and studied his face in the lighted streets, longing all
the while for some quick danger of death to threaten so that he might
spring in and save her father.  On another night, his vigil was rewarded
by a glimpse of Ruth through a second-story window.  He saw only her head
and shoulders, and her arms raised as she fixed her hair before a mirror.
It was only for a moment, but it was a long moment to him, during which
his blood turned to wine and sang through his veins.  Then she pulled
down the shade.  But it was her room--he had learned that; and thereafter
he strayed there often, hiding under a dark tree on the opposite side of
the street and smoking countless cigarettes.  One afternoon he saw her
mother coming out of a bank, and received another proof of the enormous
distance that separated Ruth from him.  She was of the class that dealt
with banks.  He had never been inside a bank in his life, and he had an
idea that such institutions were frequented only by the very rich and the
very powerful.

In one way, he had undergone a moral revolution.  Her cleanness and
purity had reacted upon him, and he felt in his being a crying need to be
clean.  He must be that if he were ever to be worthy of breathing the
same air with her.  He washed his teeth, and scrubbed his hands with a
kitchen scrub-brush till he saw a nail-brush in a drug-store window and
divined its use.  While purchasing it, the clerk glanced at his nails,
suggested a nail-file, and so he became possessed of an additional toilet-
tool.  He ran across a book in the library on the care of the body, and
promptly developed a penchant for a cold-water bath every morning, much
to the amazement of Jim, and to the bewilderment of Mr. Higginbotham, who
was not in sympathy with such high-fangled notions and who seriously
debated whether or not he should charge Martin extra for the water.
Another stride was in the direction of creased trousers.  Now that Martin
was aroused in such matters, he swiftly noted the difference between the
baggy knees of the trousers worn by the working class and the straight
line from knee to foot of those worn by the men above the working class.
Also, he learned the reason why, and invaded his sister's kitchen in
search of irons and ironing-board.  He had misadventures at first,
hopelessly burning one pair and buying another, which expenditure again
brought nearer the day on which he must put to sea.

But the reform went deeper than mere outward appearance.  He still
smoked, but he drank no more.  Up to that time, drinking had seemed to
him the proper thing for men to do, and he had prided himself on his
strong head which enabled him to drink most men under the table.  Whenever
he encountered a chance shipmate, and there were many in San Francisco,
he treated them and was treated in turn, as of old, but he ordered for
himself root beer or ginger ale and good-naturedly endured their
chaffing.  And as they waxed maudlin he studied them, watching the beast
rise and master them and thanking God that he was no longer as they.  They
had their limitations to forget, and when they were drunk, their dim,
stupid spirits were even as gods, and each ruled in his heaven of
intoxicated desire.  With Martin the need for strong drink had vanished.
He was drunken in new and more profound ways--with Ruth, who had fired
him with love and with a glimpse of higher and eternal life; with books,
that had set a myriad maggots of desire gnawing in his brain; and with
the sense of personal cleanliness he was achieving, that gave him even
more superb health than what he had enjoyed and that made his whole body
sing with physical well-being.

One night he went to the theatre, on the blind chance that he might see
her there, and from the second balcony he did see her.  He saw her come
down the aisle, with Arthur and a strange young man with a football mop
of hair and eyeglasses, the sight of whom spurred him to instant
apprehension and jealousy.  He saw her take her seat in the orchestra
circle, and little else than her did he see that night--a pair of slender
white shoulders and a mass of pale gold hair, dim with distance.  But
there were others who saw, and now and again, glancing at those about
him, he noted two young girls who looked back from the row in front, a
dozen seats along, and who smiled at him with bold eyes.  He had always
been easy-going.  It was not in his nature to give rebuff.  In the old
days he would have smiled back, and gone further and encouraged smiling.
But now it was different.  He did smile back, then looked away, and
looked no more deliberately.  But several times, forgetting the existence
of the two girls, his eyes caught their smiles.  He could not re-thumb
himself in a day, nor could he violate the intrinsic kindliness of his
nature; so, at such moments, he smiled at the girls in warm human
friendliness.  It was nothing new to him.  He knew they were reaching out
their woman's hands to him.  But it was different now.  Far down there in
the orchestra circle was the one woman in all the world, so different, so
terrifically different, from these two girls of his class, that he could
feel for them only pity and sorrow.  He had it in his heart to wish that
they could possess, in some small measure, her goodness and glory.  And
not for the world could he hurt them because of their outreaching.  He
was not flattered by it; he even felt a slight shame at his lowliness
that permitted it.  He knew, did he belong in Ruth's class, that there
would be no overtures from these girls; and with each glance of theirs he
felt the fingers of his own class clutching at him to hold him down.

He left his seat before the curtain went down on the last act, intent on
seeing Her as she passed out.  There were always numbers of men who stood
on the sidewalk outside, and he could pull his cap down over his eyes and
screen himself behind some one's shoulder so that she should not see him.
He emerged from the theatre with the first of the crowd; but scarcely had
he taken his position on the edge of the sidewalk when the two girls
appeared.  They were looking for him, he knew; and for the moment he
could have cursed that in him which drew women.  Their casual edging
across the sidewalk to the curb, as they drew near, apprised him of
discovery.  They slowed down, and were in the thick of the crown as they
came up with him.  One of them brushed against him and apparently for the
first time noticed him.  She was a slender, dark girl, with black,
defiant eyes.  But they smiled at him, and he smiled back.

"Hello," he said.

It was automatic; he had said it so often before under similar
circumstances of first meetings.  Besides, he could do no less.  There
was that large tolerance and sympathy in his nature that would permit him
to do no less.  The black-eyed girl smiled gratification and greeting,
and showed signs of stopping, while her companion, arm linked in arm,
giggled and likewise showed signs of halting.  He thought quickly.  It
would never do for Her to come out and see him talking there with them.
Quite naturally, as a matter of course, he swung in along-side the dark-
eyed one and walked with her.  There was no awkwardness on his part, no
numb tongue.  He was at home here, and he held his own royally in the
badinage, bristling with slang and sharpness, that was always the
preliminary to getting acquainted in these swift-moving affairs.  At the
corner where the main stream of people flowed onward, he started to edge
out into the cross street.  But the girl with the black eyes caught his
arm, following him and dragging her companion after her, as she cried:

"Hold on, Bill!  What's yer rush?  You're not goin' to shake us so sudden
as all that?"

He halted with a laugh, and turned, facing them.  Across their shoulders
he could see the moving throng passing under the street lamps.  Where he
stood it was not so light, and, unseen, he would be able to see Her as
she passed by.  She would certainly pass by, for that way led home.

"What's her name?" he asked of the giggling girl, nodding at the dark-
eyed one.

"You ask her," was the convulsed response.

"Well, what is it?" he demanded, turning squarely on the girl in
question.

"You ain't told me yours, yet," she retorted.

"You never asked it," he smiled.  "Besides, you guessed the first rattle.
It's Bill, all right, all right."

"Aw, go 'long with you."  She looked him in the eyes, her own sharply
passionate and inviting.  "What is it, honest?"

Again she looked.  All the centuries of woman since sex began were
eloquent in her eyes.  And he measured her in a careless way, and knew,
bold now, that she would begin to retreat, coyly and delicately, as he
pursued, ever ready to reverse the game should he turn fainthearted.  And,
too, he was human, and could feel the draw of her, while his ego could
not but appreciate the flattery of her kindness.  Oh, he knew it all, and
knew them well, from A to Z.  Good, as goodness might be measured in
their particular class, hard-working for meagre wages and scorning the
sale of self for easier ways, nervously desirous for some small pinch of
happiness in the desert of existence, and facing a future that was a
gamble between the ugliness of unending toil and the black pit of more
terrible wretchedness, the way whereto being briefer though better paid.

"Bill," he answered, nodding his head.  "Sure, Pete, Bill an' no other."

"No joshin'?" she queried.

"It ain't Bill at all," the other broke in.

"How do you know?" he demanded.  "You never laid eyes on me before."

"No need to, to know you're lyin'," was the retort.

"Straight, Bill, what is it?" the first girl asked.

"Bill'll do," he confessed.

She reached out to his arm and shook him playfully.  "I knew you was
lyin', but you look good to me just the same."

He captured the hand that invited, and felt on the palm familiar markings
and distortions.

"When'd you chuck the cannery?" he asked.

"How'd yeh know?" and, "My, ain't cheh a mind-reader!" the girls
chorussed.

And while he exchanged the stupidities of stupid minds with them, before
his inner sight towered the book-shelves of the library, filled with the
wisdom of the ages.  He smiled bitterly at the incongruity of it, and was
assailed by doubts.  But between inner vision and outward pleasantry he
found time to watch the theatre crowd streaming by.  And then he saw Her,
under the lights, between her brother and the strange young man with
glasses, and his heart seemed to stand still.  He had waited long for
this moment.  He had time to note the light, fluffy something that hid
her queenly head, the tasteful lines of her wrapped figure, the
gracefulness of her carriage and of the hand that caught up her skirts;
and then she was gone and he was left staring at the two girls of the
cannery, at their tawdry attempts at prettiness of dress, their tragic
efforts to be clean and trim, the cheap cloth, the cheap ribbons, and the
cheap rings on the fingers.  He felt a tug at his arm, and heard a voice
saying:-

"Wake up, Bill!  What's the matter with you?"

"What was you sayin'?" he asked.

"Oh, nothin'," the dark girl answered, with a toss of her head.  "I was
only remarkin'--"

"What?"

"Well, I was whisperin' it'd be a good idea if you could dig up a
gentleman friend--for her" (indicating her companion), "and then, we
could go off an' have ice-cream soda somewhere, or coffee, or anything."

He was afflicted by a sudden spiritual nausea.  The transition from Ruth
to this had been too abrupt.  Ranged side by side with the bold, defiant
eyes of the girl before him, he saw Ruth's clear, luminous eyes, like a
saint's, gazing at him out of unplumbed depths of purity.  And, somehow,
he felt within him a stir of power.  He was better than this.  Life meant
more to him than it meant to these two girls whose thoughts did not go
beyond ice-cream and a gentleman friend.  He remembered that he had led
always a secret life in his thoughts.  These thoughts he had tried to
share, but never had he found a woman capable of understanding--nor a
man.  He had tried, at times, but had only puzzled his listeners.  And as
his thoughts had been beyond them, so, he argued now, he must be beyond
them.  He felt power move in him, and clenched his fists.  If life meant
more to him, then it was for him to demand more from life, but he could
not demand it from such companionship as this.  Those bold black eyes had
nothing to offer.  He knew the thoughts behind them--of ice-cream and of
something else.  But those saint's eyes alongside--they offered all he
knew and more than he could guess.  They offered books and painting,
beauty and repose, and all the fine elegance of higher existence.  Behind
those black eyes he knew every thought process.  It was like clockwork.
He could watch every wheel go around.  Their bid was low pleasure, narrow
as the grave, that palled, and the grave was at the end of it.  But the
bid of the saint's eyes was mystery, and wonder unthinkable, and eternal
life.  He had caught glimpses of the soul in them, and glimpses of his
own soul, too.

"There's only one thing wrong with the programme," he said aloud.  "I've
got a date already."

The girl's eyes blazed her disappointment.

"To sit up with a sick friend, I suppose?" she sneered.

"No, a real, honest date with--" he faltered, "with a girl."

"You're not stringin' me?" she asked earnestly.

He looked her in the eyes and answered: "It's straight, all right.  But
why can't we meet some other time?  You ain't told me your name yet.  An'
where d'ye live?"

"Lizzie," she replied, softening toward him, her hand pressing his arm,
while her body leaned against his.  "Lizzie Connolly.  And I live at
Fifth an' Market."

He talked on a few minutes before saying good night.  He did not go home
immediately; and under the tree where he kept his vigils he looked up at
a window and murmured: "That date was with you, Ruth.  I kept it for
you."


