

CHAPTER VII


A week of heavy reading had passed since the evening he first met Ruth
Morse, and still he dared not call.  Time and again he nerved himself up
to call, but under the doubts that assailed him his determination died
away.  He did not know the proper time to call, nor was there any one to
tell him, and he was afraid of committing himself to an irretrievable
blunder.  Having shaken himself free from his old companions and old ways
of life, and having no new companions, nothing remained for him but to
read, and the long hours he devoted to it would have ruined a dozen pairs
of ordinary eyes.  But his eyes were strong, and they were backed by a
body superbly strong.  Furthermore, his mind was fallow.  It had lain
fallow all his life so far as the abstract thought of the books was
concerned, and it was ripe for the sowing.  It had never been jaded by
study, and it bit hold of the knowledge in the books with sharp teeth
that would not let go.

It seemed to him, by the end of the week, that he had lived centuries, so
far behind were the old life and outlook.  But he was baffled by lack of
preparation.  He attempted to read books that required years of
preliminary specialization.  One day he would read a book of antiquated
philosophy, and the next day one that was ultra-modern, so that his head
would be whirling with the conflict and contradiction of ideas.  It was
the same with the economists.  On the one shelf at the library he found
Karl Marx, Ricardo, Adam Smith, and Mill, and the abstruse formulas of
the one gave no clew that the ideas of another were obsolete.  He was
bewildered, and yet he wanted to know.  He had become interested, in a
day, in economics, industry, and politics.  Passing through the City Hall
Park, he had noticed a group of men, in the centre of which were half a
dozen, with flushed faces and raised voices, earnestly carrying on a
discussion.  He joined the listeners, and heard a new, alien tongue in
the mouths of the philosophers of the people.  One was a tramp, another
was a labor agitator, a third was a law-school student, and the remainder
was composed of wordy workingmen.  For the first time he heard of
socialism, anarchism, and single tax, and learned that there were warring
social philosophies.  He heard hundreds of technical words that were new
to him, belonging to fields of thought that his meagre reading had never
touched upon.  Because of this he could not follow the arguments closely,
and he could only guess at and surmise the ideas wrapped up in such
strange expressions.  Then there was a black-eyed restaurant waiter who
was a theosophist, a union baker who was an agnostic, an old man who
baffled all of them with the strange philosophy that _what is is right_,
and another old man who discoursed interminably about the cosmos and the
father-atom and the mother-atom.

Martin Eden's head was in a state of addlement when he went away after
several hours, and he hurried to the library to look up the definitions
of a dozen unusual words.  And when he left the library, he carried under
his arm four volumes: Madam Blavatsky's "Secret Doctrine," "Progress and
Poverty," "The Quintessence of Socialism," and, "Warfare of Religion and
Science."  Unfortunately, he began on the "Secret Doctrine."  Every line
bristled with many-syllabled words he did not understand.  He sat up in
bed, and the dictionary was in front of him more often than the book.  He
looked up so many new words that when they recurred, he had forgotten
their meaning and had to look them up again.  He devised the plan of
writing the definitions in a note-book, and filled page after page with
them.  And still he could not understand.  He read until three in the
morning, and his brain was in a turmoil, but not one essential thought in
the text had he grasped.  He looked up, and it seemed that the room was
lifting, heeling, and plunging like a ship upon the sea.  Then he hurled
the "Secret Doctrine" and many curses across the room, turned off the
gas, and composed himself to sleep.  Nor did he have much better luck
with the other three books.  It was not that his brain was weak or
incapable; it could think these thoughts were it not for lack of training
in thinking and lack of the thought-tools with which to think.  He
guessed this, and for a while entertained the idea of reading nothing but
the dictionary until he had mastered every word in it.

Poetry, however, was his solace, and he read much of it, finding his
greatest joy in the simpler poets, who were more understandable.  He
loved beauty, and there he found beauty.  Poetry, like music, stirred him
profoundly, and, though he did not know it, he was preparing his mind for
the heavier work that was to come.  The pages of his mind were blank,
and, without effort, much he read and liked, stanza by stanza, was
impressed upon those pages, so that he was soon able to extract great joy
from chanting aloud or under his breath the music and the beauty of the
printed words he had read.  Then he stumbled upon Gayley's "Classic
Myths" and Bulfinch's "Age of Fable," side by side on a library shelf.  It
was illumination, a great light in the darkness of his ignorance, and he
read poetry more avidly than ever.

The man at the desk in the library had seen Martin there so often that he
had become quite cordial, always greeting him with a smile and a nod when
he entered.  It was because of this that Martin did a daring thing.
Drawing out some books at the desk, and while the man was stamping the
cards, Martin blurted out:-

"Say, there's something I'd like to ask you."

The man smiled and paid attention.

"When you meet a young lady an' she asks you to call, how soon can you
call?"

Martin felt his shirt press and cling to his shoulders, what of the sweat
of the effort.

"Why I'd say any time," the man answered.

"Yes, but this is different," Martin objected.  "She--I--well, you see,
it's this way: maybe she won't be there.  She goes to the university."

"Then call again."

"What I said ain't what I meant," Martin confessed falteringly, while he
made up his mind to throw himself wholly upon the other's mercy.  "I'm
just a rough sort of a fellow, an' I ain't never seen anything of
society.  This girl is all that I ain't, an' I ain't anything that she
is.  You don't think I'm playin' the fool, do you?" he demanded abruptly.

"No, no; not at all, I assure you," the other protested.  "Your request
is not exactly in the scope of the reference department, but I shall be
only too pleased to assist you."

Martin looked at him admiringly.

"If I could tear it off that way, I'd be all right," he said.

"I beg pardon?"

"I mean if I could talk easy that way, an' polite, an' all the rest."

"Oh," said the other, with comprehension.

"What is the best time to call?  The afternoon?--not too close to meal-
time?  Or the evening?  Or Sunday?"

"I'll tell you," the librarian said with a brightening face.  "You call
her up on the telephone and find out."

"I'll do it," he said, picking up his books and starting away.

He turned back and asked:-

"When you're speakin' to a young lady--say, for instance, Miss Lizzie
Smith--do you say 'Miss Lizzie'? or 'Miss Smith'?"

"Say 'Miss Smith,'" the librarian stated authoritatively.  "Say 'Miss
Smith' always--until you come to know her better."

So it was that Martin Eden solved the problem.

"Come down any time; I'll be at home all afternoon," was Ruth's reply
over the telephone to his stammered request as to when he could return
the borrowed books.

She met him at the door herself, and her woman's eyes took in immediately
the creased trousers and the certain slight but indefinable change in him
for the better.  Also, she was struck by his face.  It was almost
violent, this health of his, and it seemed to rush out of him and at her
in waves of force.  She felt the urge again of the desire to lean toward
him for warmth, and marvelled again at the effect his presence produced
upon her.  And he, in turn, knew again the swimming sensation of bliss
when he felt the contact of her hand in greeting.  The difference between
them lay in that she was cool and self-possessed while his face flushed
to the roots of the hair.  He stumbled with his old awkwardness after
her, and his shoulders swung and lurched perilously.

Once they were seated in the living-room, he began to get on easily--more
easily by far than he had expected.  She made it easy for him; and the
gracious spirit with which she did it made him love her more madly than
ever.  They talked first of the borrowed books, of the Swinburne he was
devoted to, and of the Browning he did not understand; and she led the
conversation on from subject to subject, while she pondered the problem
of how she could be of help to him.  She had thought of this often since
their first meeting.  She wanted to help him.  He made a call upon her
pity and tenderness that no one had ever made before, and the pity was
not so much derogatory of him as maternal in her.  Her pity could not be
of the common sort, when the man who drew it was so much man as to shock
her with maidenly fears and set her mind and pulse thrilling with strange
thoughts and feelings.  The old fascination of his neck was there, and
there was sweetness in the thought of laying her hands upon it.  It
seemed still a wanton impulse, but she had grown more used to it.  She
did not dream that in such guise new-born love would epitomize itself.
Nor did she dream that the feeling he excited in her was love.  She
thought she was merely interested in him as an unusual type possessing
various potential excellencies, and she even felt philanthropic about it.

She did not know she desired him; but with him it was different.  He knew
that he loved her, and he desired her as he had never before desired
anything in his life.  He had loved poetry for beauty's sake; but since
he met her the gates to the vast field of love-poetry had been opened
wide.  She had given him understanding even more than Bulfinch and
Gayley.  There was a line that a week before he would not have favored
with a second thought--"God's own mad lover dying on a kiss"; but now it
was ever insistent in his mind.  He marvelled at the wonder of it and the
truth; and as he gazed upon her he knew that he could die gladly upon a
kiss.  He felt himself God's own mad lover, and no accolade of knighthood
could have given him greater pride.  And at last he knew the meaning of
life and why he had been born.

As he gazed at her and listened, his thoughts grew daring.  He reviewed
all the wild delight of the pressure of her hand in his at the door, and
longed for it again.  His gaze wandered often toward her lips, and he
yearned for them hungrily.  But there was nothing gross or earthly about
this yearning.  It gave him exquisite delight to watch every movement and
play of those lips as they enunciated the words she spoke; yet they were
not ordinary lips such as all men and women had.  Their substance was not
mere human clay.  They were lips of pure spirit, and his desire for them
seemed absolutely different from the desire that had led him to other
women's lips.  He could kiss her lips, rest his own physical lips upon
them, but it would be with the lofty and awful fervor with which one
would kiss the robe of God.  He was not conscious of this transvaluation
of values that had taken place in him, and was unaware that the light
that shone in his eyes when he looked at her was quite the same light
that shines in all men's eyes when the desire of love is upon them.  He
did not dream how ardent and masculine his gaze was, nor that the warm
flame of it was affecting the alchemy of her spirit.  Her penetrative
virginity exalted and disguised his own emotions, elevating his thoughts
to a star-cool chastity, and he would have been startled to learn that
there was that shining out of his eyes, like warm waves, that flowed
through her and kindled a kindred warmth.  She was subtly perturbed by
it, and more than once, though she knew not why, it disrupted her train
of thought with its delicious intrusion and compelled her to grope for
the remainder of ideas partly uttered.  Speech was always easy with her,
and these interruptions would have puzzled her had she not decided that
it was because he was a remarkable type.  She was very sensitive to
impressions, and it was not strange, after all, that this aura of a
traveller from another world should so affect her.

The problem in the background of her consciousness was how to help him,
and she turned the conversation in that direction; but it was Martin who
came to the point first.

"I wonder if I can get some advice from you," he began, and received an
acquiescence of willingness that made his heart bound.  "You remember the
other time I was here I said I couldn't talk about books an' things
because I didn't know how?  Well, I've ben doin' a lot of thinkin' ever
since.  I've ben to the library a whole lot, but most of the books I've
tackled have ben over my head.  Mebbe I'd better begin at the beginnin'.
I ain't never had no advantages.  I've worked pretty hard ever since I
was a kid, an' since I've ben to the library, lookin' with new eyes at
books--an' lookin' at new books, too--I've just about concluded that I
ain't ben reading the right kind.  You know the books you find in cattle-
camps an' fo'c's'ls ain't the same you've got in this house, for
instance.  Well, that's the sort of readin' matter I've ben accustomed
to.  And yet--an' I ain't just makin' a brag of it--I've ben different
from the people I've herded with.  Not that I'm any better than the
sailors an' cow-punchers I travelled with,--I was cow-punchin' for a
short time, you know,--but I always liked books, read everything I could
lay hands on, an'--well, I guess I think differently from most of 'em.

"Now, to come to what I'm drivin' at.  I was never inside a house like
this.  When I come a week ago, an' saw all this, an' you, an' your
mother, an' brothers, an' everything--well, I liked it.  I'd heard about
such things an' read about such things in some of the books, an' when I
looked around at your house, why, the books come true.  But the thing I'm
after is I liked it.  I wanted it.  I want it now.  I want to breathe air
like you get in this house--air that is filled with books, and pictures,
and beautiful things, where people talk in low voices an' are clean, an'
their thoughts are clean.  The air I always breathed was mixed up with
grub an' house-rent an' scrappin' an booze an' that's all they talked
about, too.  Why, when you was crossin' the room to kiss your mother, I
thought it was the most beautiful thing I ever seen.  I've seen a whole
lot of life, an' somehow I've seen a whole lot more of it than most of
them that was with me.  I like to see, an' I want to see more, an' I want
to see it different.

"But I ain't got to the point yet.  Here it is.  I want to make my way to
the kind of life you have in this house.  There's more in life than
booze, an' hard work, an' knockin' about.  Now, how am I goin' to get it?
Where do I take hold an' begin?  I'm willin' to work my passage, you
know, an' I can make most men sick when it comes to hard work.  Once I
get started, I'll work night an' day.  Mebbe you think it's funny, me
askin' you about all this.  I know you're the last person in the world I
ought to ask, but I don't know anybody else I could ask--unless it's
Arthur.  Mebbe I ought to ask him.  If I was--"

His voice died away.  His firmly planned intention had come to a halt on
the verge of the horrible probability that he should have asked Arthur
and that he had made a fool of himself.  Ruth did not speak immediately.
She was too absorbed in striving to reconcile the stumbling, uncouth
speech and its simplicity of thought with what she saw in his face.  She
had never looked in eyes that expressed greater power.  Here was a man
who could do anything, was the message she read there, and it accorded
ill with the weakness of his spoken thought.  And for that matter so
complex and quick was her own mind that she did not have a just
appreciation of simplicity.  And yet she had caught an impression of
power in the very groping of this mind.  It had seemed to her like a
giant writhing and straining at the bonds that held him down.  Her face
was all sympathy when she did speak.

"What you need, you realize yourself, and it is education.  You should go
back and finish grammar school, and then go through to high school and
university."

"But that takes money," he interrupted.

"Oh!" she cried.  "I had not thought of that.  But then you have
relatives, somebody who could assist you?"

He shook his head.

"My father and mother are dead.  I've two sisters, one married, an' the
other'll get married soon, I suppose.  Then I've a string of
brothers,--I'm the youngest,--but they never helped nobody.  They've just
knocked around over the world, lookin' out for number one.  The oldest
died in India.  Two are in South Africa now, an' another's on a whaling
voyage, an' one's travellin' with a circus--he does trapeze work.  An' I
guess I'm just like them.  I've taken care of myself since I was
eleven--that's when my mother died.  I've got to study by myself, I
guess, an' what I want to know is where to begin."

"I should say the first thing of all would be to get a grammar.  Your
grammar is--"  She had intended saying "awful," but she amended it to "is
not particularly good."

He flushed and sweated.

"I know I must talk a lot of slang an' words you don't understand.  But
then they're the only words I know--how to speak.  I've got other words
in my mind, picked 'em up from books, but I can't pronounce 'em, so I
don't use 'em."

"It isn't what you say, so much as how you say it.  You don't mind my
being frank, do you?  I don't want to hurt you."

"No, no," he cried, while he secretly blessed her for her kindness.  "Fire
away.  I've got to know, an' I'd sooner know from you than anybody else."

"Well, then, you say, 'You was'; it should be, 'You were.'  You say 'I
seen' for 'I saw.'  You use the double negative--"

"What's the double negative?" he demanded; then added humbly, "You see, I
don't even understand your explanations."

"I'm afraid I didn't explain that," she smiled.  "A double negative
is--let me see--well, you say, 'never helped nobody.'  'Never' is a
negative.  'Nobody' is another negative.  It is a rule that two negatives
make a positive.  'Never helped nobody' means that, not helping nobody,
they must have helped somebody."

"That's pretty clear," he said.  "I never thought of it before.  But it
don't mean they _must_ have helped somebody, does it?  Seems to me that
'never helped nobody' just naturally fails to say whether or not they
helped somebody.  I never thought of it before, and I'll never say it
again."

She was pleased and surprised with the quickness and surety of his mind.
As soon as he had got the clew he not only understood but corrected her
error.

"You'll find it all in the grammar," she went on.  "There's something
else I noticed in your speech.  You say 'don't' when you shouldn't.
'Don't' is a contraction and stands for two words.  Do you know them?"

He thought a moment, then answered, "'Do not.'"

She nodded her head, and said, "And you use 'don't' when you mean 'does
not.'"

He was puzzled over this, and did not get it so quickly.

"Give me an illustration," he asked.

"Well--"  She puckered her brows and pursed up her mouth as she thought,
while he looked on and decided that her expression was most adorable.
"'It don't do to be hasty.'  Change 'don't' to 'do not,' and it reads,
'It do not do to be hasty,' which is perfectly absurd."

He turned it over in his mind and considered.

"Doesn't it jar on your ear?" she suggested.

"Can't say that it does," he replied judicially.

"Why didn't you say, 'Can't say that it do'?" she queried.

"That sounds wrong," he said slowly.  "As for the other I can't make up
my mind.  I guess my ear ain't had the trainin' yours has."

"There is no such word as 'ain't,'" she said, prettily emphatic.

Martin flushed again.

"And you say 'ben' for 'been,'" she continued; "'come' for 'came'; and
the way you chop your endings is something dreadful."

"How do you mean?"  He leaned forward, feeling that he ought to get down
on his knees before so marvellous a mind.  "How do I chop?"

"You don't complete the endings.  'A-n-d' spells 'and.'  You pronounce it
'an'.'  'I-n-g' spells 'ing.'  Sometimes you pronounce it 'ing' and
sometimes you leave off the 'g.'  And then you slur by dropping initial
letters and diphthongs.  'T-h-e-m' spells 'them.'  You pronounce it--oh,
well, it is not necessary to go over all of them.  What you need is the
grammar.  I'll get one and show you how to begin."

As she arose, there shot through his mind something that he had read in
the etiquette books, and he stood up awkwardly, worrying as to whether he
was doing the right thing, and fearing that she might take it as a sign
that he was about to go.

"By the way, Mr. Eden," she called back, as she was leaving the room.
"What is _booze_?  You used it several times, you know."

"Oh, booze," he laughed.  "It's slang.  It means whiskey an'
beer--anything that will make you drunk."

"And another thing," she laughed back.  "Don't use 'you' when you are
impersonal.  'You' is very personal, and your use of it just now was not
precisely what you meant."

"I don't just see that."

"Why, you said just now, to me, 'whiskey and beer--anything that will
make you drunk'--make me drunk, don't you see?"

"Well, it would, wouldn't it?"

"Yes, of course," she smiled.  "But it would be nicer not to bring me
into it.  Substitute 'one' for 'you' and see how much better it sounds."

When she returned with the grammar, she drew a chair near his--he
wondered if he should have helped her with the chair--and sat down beside
him.  She turned the pages of the grammar, and their heads were inclined
toward each other.  He could hardly follow her outlining of the work he
must do, so amazed was he by her delightful propinquity.  But when she
began to lay down the importance of conjugation, he forgot all about her.
He had never heard of conjugation, and was fascinated by the glimpse he
was catching into the tie-ribs of language.  He leaned closer to the
page, and her hair touched his cheek.  He had fainted but once in his
life, and he thought he was going to faint again.  He could scarcely
breathe, and his heart was pounding the blood up into his throat and
suffocating him.  Never had she seemed so accessible as now.  For the
moment the great gulf that separated them was bridged.  But there was no
diminution in the loftiness of his feeling for her.  She had not
descended to him.  It was he who had been caught up into the clouds and
carried to her.  His reverence for her, in that moment, was of the same
order as religious awe and fervor.  It seemed to him that he had intruded
upon the holy of holies, and slowly and carefully he moved his head aside
from the contact which thrilled him like an electric shock and of which
she had not been aware.


