

CHAPTER VIII


Several weeks went by, during which Martin Eden studied his grammar,
reviewed the books on etiquette, and read voraciously the books that
caught his fancy.  Of his own class he saw nothing.  The girls of the
Lotus Club wondered what had become of him and worried Jim with
questions, and some of the fellows who put on the glove at Riley's were
glad that Martin came no more.  He made another discovery of treasure-
trove in the library.  As the grammar had shown him the tie-ribs of
language, so that book showed him the tie-ribs of poetry, and he began to
learn metre and construction and form, beneath the beauty he loved
finding the why and wherefore of that beauty.  Another modern book he
found treated poetry as a representative art, treated it exhaustively,
with copious illustrations from the best in literature.  Never had he
read fiction with so keen zest as he studied these books.  And his fresh
mind, untaxed for twenty years and impelled by maturity of desire,
gripped hold of what he read with a virility unusual to the student mind.

When he looked back now from his vantage-ground, the old world he had
known, the world of land and sea and ships, of sailor-men and
harpy-women, seemed a very small world; and yet it blended in with this
new world and expanded.  His mind made for unity, and he was surprised
when at first he began to see points of contact between the two worlds.
And he was ennobled, as well, by the loftiness of thought and beauty he
found in the books.  This led him to believe more firmly than ever that
up above him, in society like Ruth and her family, all men and women
thought these thoughts and lived them.  Down below where he lived was the
ignoble, and he wanted to purge himself of the ignoble that had soiled
all his days, and to rise to that sublimated realm where dwelt the upper
classes.  All his childhood and youth had been troubled by a vague
unrest; he had never known what he wanted, but he had wanted something
that he had hunted vainly for until he met Ruth.  And now his unrest had
become sharp and painful, and he knew at last, clearly and definitely,
that it was beauty, and intellect, and love that he must have.

During those several weeks he saw Ruth half a dozen times, and each time
was an added inspiration.  She helped him with his English, corrected his
pronunciation, and started him on arithmetic.  But their intercourse was
not all devoted to elementary study.  He had seen too much of life, and
his mind was too matured, to be wholly content with fractions, cube root,
parsing, and analysis; and there were times when their conversation
turned on other themes--the last poetry he had read, the latest poet she
had studied.  And when she read aloud to him her favorite passages, he
ascended to the topmost heaven of delight.  Never, in all the women he
had heard speak, had he heard a voice like hers.  The least sound of it
was a stimulus to his love, and he thrilled and throbbed with every word
she uttered.  It was the quality of it, the repose, and the musical
modulation--the soft, rich, indefinable product of culture and a gentle
soul.  As he listened to her, there rang in the ears of his memory the
harsh cries of barbarian women and of hags, and, in lesser degrees of
harshness, the strident voices of working women and of the girls of his
own class.  Then the chemistry of vision would begin to work, and they
would troop in review across his mind, each, by contrast, multiplying
Ruth's glories.  Then, too, his bliss was heightened by the knowledge
that her mind was comprehending what she read and was quivering with
appreciation of the beauty of the written thought.  She read to him much
from "The Princess," and often he saw her eyes swimming with tears, so
finely was her aesthetic nature strung.  At such moments her own emotions
elevated him till he was as a god, and, as he gazed at her and listened,
he seemed gazing on the face of life and reading its deepest secrets.  And
then, becoming aware of the heights of exquisite sensibility he attained,
he decided that this was love and that love was the greatest thing in the
world.  And in review would pass along the corridors of memory all
previous thrills and burnings he had known,--the drunkenness of wine, the
caresses of women, the rough play and give and take of physical
contests,--and they seemed trivial and mean compared with this sublime
ardor he now enjoyed.

The situation was obscured to Ruth.  She had never had any experiences of
the heart.  Her only experiences in such matters were of the books, where
the facts of ordinary day were translated by fancy into a fairy realm of
unreality; and she little knew that this rough sailor was creeping into
her heart and storing there pent forces that would some day burst forth
and surge through her in waves of fire.  She did not know the actual fire
of love.  Her knowledge of love was purely theoretical, and she conceived
of it as lambent flame, gentle as the fall of dew or the ripple of quiet
water, and cool as the velvet-dark of summer nights.  Her idea of love
was more that of placid affection, serving the loved one softly in an
atmosphere, flower-scented and dim-lighted, of ethereal calm.  She did
not dream of the volcanic convulsions of love, its scorching heat and
sterile wastes of parched ashes.  She knew neither her own potencies, nor
the potencies of the world; and the deeps of life were to her seas of
illusion.  The conjugal affection of her father and mother constituted
her ideal of love-affinity, and she looked forward some day to emerging,
without shock or friction, into that same quiet sweetness of existence
with a loved one.

So it was that she looked upon Martin Eden as a novelty, a strange
individual, and she identified with novelty and strangeness the effects
he produced upon her.  It was only natural.  In similar ways she had
experienced unusual feelings when she looked at wild animals in the
menagerie, or when she witnessed a storm of wind, or shuddered at the
bright-ribbed lightning.  There was something cosmic in such things, and
there was something cosmic in him.  He came to her breathing of large
airs and great spaces.  The blaze of tropic suns was in his face, and in
his swelling, resilient muscles was the primordial vigor of life.  He was
marred and scarred by that mysterious world of rough men and rougher
deeds, the outposts of which began beyond her horizon.  He was untamed,
wild, and in secret ways her vanity was touched by the fact that he came
so mildly to her hand.  Likewise she was stirred by the common impulse to
tame the wild thing.  It was an unconscious impulse, and farthest from
her thoughts that her desire was to re-thumb the clay of him into a
likeness of her father's image, which image she believed to be the finest
in the world.  Nor was there any way, out of her inexperience, for her to
know that the cosmic feel she caught of him was that most cosmic of
things, love, which with equal power drew men and women together across
the world, compelled stags to kill each other in the rutting season, and
drove even the elements irresistibly to unite.

His swift development was a source of surprise and interest.  She
detected unguessed finenesses in him that seemed to bud, day by day, like
flowers in congenial soil.  She read Browning aloud to him, and was often
puzzled by the strange interpretations he gave to mooted passages.  It
was beyond her to realize that, out of his experience of men and women
and life, his interpretations were far more frequently correct than hers.
His conceptions seemed naive to her, though she was often fired by his
daring flights of comprehension, whose orbit-path was so wide among the
stars that she could not follow and could only sit and thrill to the
impact of unguessed power.  Then she played to him--no longer at him--and
probed him with music that sank to depths beyond her plumb-line.  His
nature opened to music as a flower to the sun, and the transition was
quick from his working-class rag-time and jingles to her classical
display pieces that she knew nearly by heart.  Yet he betrayed a
democratic fondness for Wagner, and the "Tannhauser" overture, when she
had given him the clew to it, claimed him as nothing else she played.  In
an immediate way it personified his life.  All his past was the Venusburg
motif, while her he identified somehow with the Pilgrim's Chorus motif;
and from the exalted state this elevated him to, he swept onward and
upward into that vast shadow-realm of spirit-groping, where good and evil
war eternally.

Sometimes he questioned, and induced in her mind temporary doubts as to
the correctness of her own definitions and conceptions of music.  But her
singing he did not question.  It was too wholly her, and he sat always
amazed at the divine melody of her pure soprano voice.  And he could not
help but contrast it with the weak pipings and shrill quaverings of
factory girls, ill-nourished and untrained, and with the raucous
shriekings from gin-cracked throats of the women of the seaport towns.
She enjoyed singing and playing to him.  In truth, it was the first time
she had ever had a human soul to play with, and the plastic clay of him
was a delight to mould; for she thought she was moulding it, and her
intentions were good.  Besides, it was pleasant to be with him.  He did
not repel her.  That first repulsion had been really a fear of her
undiscovered self, and the fear had gone to sleep.  Though she did not
know it, she had a feeling in him of proprietary right.  Also, he had a
tonic effect upon her.  She was studying hard at the university, and it
seemed to strengthen her to emerge from the dusty books and have the
fresh sea-breeze of his personality blow upon her.  Strength!  Strength
was what she needed, and he gave it to her in generous measure.  To come
into the same room with him, or to meet him at the door, was to take
heart of life.  And when he had gone, she would return to her books with
a keener zest and fresh store of energy.

She knew her Browning, but it had never sunk into her that it was an
awkward thing to play with souls.  As her interest in Martin increased,
the remodelling of his life became a passion with her.

"There is Mr. Butler," she said one afternoon, when grammar and
arithmetic and poetry had been put aside.

"He had comparatively no advantages at first.  His father had been a bank
cashier, but he lingered for years, dying of consumption in Arizona, so
that when he was dead, Mr. Butler, Charles Butler he was called, found
himself alone in the world.  His father had come from Australia, you
know, and so he had no relatives in California.  He went to work in a
printing-office,--I have heard him tell of it many times,--and he got
three dollars a week, at first.  His income to-day is at least thirty
thousand a year.  How did he do it?  He was honest, and faithful, and
industrious, and economical.  He denied himself the enjoyments that most
boys indulge in.  He made it a point to save so much every week, no
matter what he had to do without in order to save it.  Of course, he was
soon earning more than three dollars a week, and as his wages increased
he saved more and more.

"He worked in the daytime, and at night he went to night school.  He had
his eyes fixed always on the future.  Later on he went to night high
school.  When he was only seventeen, he was earning excellent wages at
setting type, but he was ambitious.  He wanted a career, not a
livelihood, and he was content to make immediate sacrifices for his
ultimate again.  He decided upon the law, and he entered father's office
as an office boy--think of that!--and got only four dollars a week.  But
he had learned how to be economical, and out of that four dollars he went
on saving money."

She paused for breath, and to note how Martin was receiving it.  His face
was lighted up with interest in the youthful struggles of Mr. Butler; but
there was a frown upon his face as well.

"I'd say they was pretty hard lines for a young fellow," he remarked.
"Four dollars a week!  How could he live on it?  You can bet he didn't
have any frills.  Why, I pay five dollars a week for board now, an'
there's nothin' excitin' about it, you can lay to that.  He must have
lived like a dog.  The food he ate--"

"He cooked for himself," she interrupted, "on a little kerosene stove."

"The food he ate must have been worse than what a sailor gets on the
worst-feedin' deep-water ships, than which there ain't much that can be
possibly worse."

"But think of him now!" she cried enthusiastically.  "Think of what his
income affords him.  His early denials are paid for a thousand-fold."

Martin looked at her sharply.

"There's one thing I'll bet you," he said, "and it is that Mr. Butler is
nothin' gay-hearted now in his fat days.  He fed himself like that for
years an' years, on a boy's stomach, an' I bet his stomach's none too
good now for it."

Her eyes dropped before his searching gaze.

"I'll bet he's got dyspepsia right now!" Martin challenged.

"Yes, he has," she confessed; "but--"

"An' I bet," Martin dashed on, "that he's solemn an' serious as an old
owl, an' doesn't care a rap for a good time, for all his thirty thousand
a year.  An' I'll bet he's not particularly joyful at seein' others have
a good time.  Ain't I right?"

She nodded her head in agreement, and hastened to explain:-

"But he is not that type of man.  By nature he is sober and serious.  He
always was that."

"You can bet he was," Martin proclaimed.  "Three dollars a week, an' four
dollars a week, an' a young boy cookin' for himself on an oil-burner an'
layin' up money, workin' all day an' studyin' all night, just workin' an'
never playin', never havin' a good time, an' never learnin' how to have a
good time--of course his thirty thousand came along too late."

His sympathetic imagination was flashing upon his inner sight all the
thousands of details of the boy's existence and of his narrow spiritual
development into a thirty-thousand-dollar-a-year man.  With the swiftness
and wide-reaching of multitudinous thought Charles Butler's whole life
was telescoped upon his vision.

"Do you know," he added, "I feel sorry for Mr. Butler.  He was too young
to know better, but he robbed himself of life for the sake of thirty
thousand a year that's clean wasted upon him.  Why, thirty thousand, lump
sum, wouldn't buy for him right now what ten cents he was layin' up would
have bought him, when he was a kid, in the way of candy an' peanuts or a
seat in nigger heaven."

It was just such uniqueness of points of view that startled Ruth.  Not
only were they new to her, and contrary to her own beliefs, but she
always felt in them germs of truth that threatened to unseat or modify
her own convictions.  Had she been fourteen instead of twenty-four, she
might have been changed by them; but she was twenty-four, conservative by
nature and upbringing, and already crystallized into the cranny of life
where she had been born and formed.  It was true, his bizarre judgments
troubled her in the moments they were uttered, but she ascribed them to
his novelty of type and strangeness of living, and they were soon
forgotten.  Nevertheless, while she disapproved of them, the strength of
their utterance, and the flashing of eyes and earnestness of face that
accompanied them, always thrilled her and drew her toward him.  She would
never have guessed that this man who had come from beyond her horizon,
was, in such moments, flashing on beyond her horizon with wider and
deeper concepts.  Her own limits were the limits of her horizon; but
limited minds can recognize limitations only in others.  And so she felt
that her outlook was very wide indeed, and that where his conflicted with
hers marked his limitations; and she dreamed of helping him to see as she
saw, of widening his horizon until it was identified with hers.

"But I have not finished my story," she said.  "He worked, so father
says, as no other office boy he ever had.  Mr. Butler was always eager to
work.  He never was late, and he was usually at the office a few minutes
before his regular time.  And yet he saved his time.  Every spare moment
was devoted to study.  He studied book-keeping and type-writing, and he
paid for lessons in shorthand by dictating at night to a court reporter
who needed practice.  He quickly became a clerk, and he made himself
invaluable.  Father appreciated him and saw that he was bound to rise.  It
was on father's suggestion that he went to law college.  He became a
lawyer, and hardly was he back in the office when father took him in as
junior partner.  He is a great man.  He refused the United States Senate
several times, and father says he could become a justice of the Supreme
Court any time a vacancy occurs, if he wants to.  Such a life is an
inspiration to all of us.  It shows us that a man with will may rise
superior to his environment."

"He is a great man," Martin said sincerely.

But it seemed to him there was something in the recital that jarred upon
his sense of beauty and life.  He could not find an adequate motive in
Mr. Butler's life of pinching and privation.  Had he done it for love of
a woman, or for attainment of beauty, Martin would have understood.  God's
own mad lover should do anything for the kiss, but not for thirty
thousand dollars a year.  He was dissatisfied with Mr. Butler's career.
There was something paltry about it, after all.  Thirty thousand a year
was all right, but dyspepsia and inability to be humanly happy robbed
such princely income of all its value.

Much of this he strove to express to Ruth, and shocked her and made it
clear that more remodelling was necessary.  Hers was that common
insularity of mind that makes human creatures believe that their color,
creed, and politics are best and right and that other human creatures
scattered over the world are less fortunately placed than they.  It was
the same insularity of mind that made the ancient Jew thank God he was
not born a woman, and sent the modern missionary god-substituting to the
ends of the earth; and it made Ruth desire to shape this man from other
crannies of life into the likeness of the men who lived in her particular
cranny of life.


