

CHAPTER IX


Back from sea Martin Eden came, homing for California with a lover's
desire.  His store of money exhausted, he had shipped before the mast on
the treasure-hunting schooner; and the Solomon Islands, after eight
months of failure to find treasure, had witnessed the breaking up of the
expedition.  The men had been paid off in Australia, and Martin had
immediately shipped on a deep-water vessel for San Francisco.  Not alone
had those eight months earned him enough money to stay on land for many
weeks, but they had enabled him to do a great deal of studying and
reading.

His was the student's mind, and behind his ability to learn was the
indomitability of his nature and his love for Ruth.  The grammar he had
taken along he went through again and again until his unjaded brain had
mastered it.  He noticed the bad grammar used by his shipmates, and made
a point of mentally correcting and reconstructing their crudities of
speech.  To his great joy he discovered that his ear was becoming
sensitive and that he was developing grammatical nerves.  A double
negative jarred him like a discord, and often, from lack of practice, it
was from his own lips that the jar came.  His tongue refused to learn new
tricks in a day.

After he had been through the grammar repeatedly, he took up the
dictionary and added twenty words a day to his vocabulary.  He found that
this was no light task, and at wheel or lookout he steadily went over and
over his lengthening list of pronunciations and definitions, while he
invariably memorized himself to sleep.  "Never did anything," "if I
were," and "those things," were phrases, with many variations, that he
repeated under his breath in order to accustom his tongue to the language
spoken by Ruth.  "And" and "ing," with the "d" and "g" pronounced
emphatically, he went over thousands of times; and to his surprise he
noticed that he was beginning to speak cleaner and more correct English
than the officers themselves and the gentleman-adventurers in the cabin
who had financed the expedition.

The captain was a fishy-eyed Norwegian who somehow had fallen into
possession of a complete Shakespeare, which he never read, and Martin had
washed his clothes for him and in return been permitted access to the
precious volumes.  For a time, so steeped was he in the plays and in the
many favorite passages that impressed themselves almost without effort on
his brain, that all the world seemed to shape itself into forms of
Elizabethan tragedy or comedy and his very thoughts were in blank verse.
It trained his ear and gave him a fine appreciation for noble English;
withal it introduced into his mind much that was archaic and obsolete.

The eight months had been well spent, and, in addition to what he had
learned of right speaking and high thinking, he had learned much of
himself.  Along with his humbleness because he knew so little, there
arose a conviction of power.  He felt a sharp gradation between himself
and his shipmates, and was wise enough to realize that the difference lay
in potentiality rather than achievement.  What he could do,--they could
do; but within him he felt a confused ferment working that told him there
was more in him than he had done.  He was tortured by the exquisite
beauty of the world, and wished that Ruth were there to share it with
him.  He decided that he would describe to her many of the bits of South
Sea beauty.  The creative spirit in him flamed up at the thought and
urged that he recreate this beauty for a wider audience than Ruth.  And
then, in splendor and glory, came the great idea.  He would write.  He
would be one of the eyes through which the world saw, one of the ears
through which it heard, one of the hearts through which it felt.  He
would write--everything--poetry and prose, fiction and description, and
plays like Shakespeare.  There was career and the way to win to Ruth.  The
men of literature were the world's giants, and he conceived them to be
far finer than the Mr. Butlers who earned thirty thousand a year and
could be Supreme Court justices if they wanted to.

Once the idea had germinated, it mastered him, and the return voyage to
San Francisco was like a dream.  He was drunken with unguessed power and
felt that he could do anything.  In the midst of the great and lonely sea
he gained perspective.  Clearly, and for the first lime, he saw Ruth and
her world.  It was all visualized in his mind as a concrete thing which
he could take up in his two hands and turn around and about and examine.
There was much that was dim and nebulous in that world, but he saw it as
a whole and not in detail, and he saw, also, the way to master it.  To
write!  The thought was fire in him.  He would begin as soon as he got
back.  The first thing he would do would be to describe the voyage of the
treasure-hunters.  He would sell it to some San Francisco newspaper.  He
would not tell Ruth anything about it, and she would be surprised and
pleased when she saw his name in print.  While he wrote, he could go on
studying.  There were twenty-four hours in each day.  He was invincible.
He knew how to work, and the citadels would go down before him.  He would
not have to go to sea again--as a sailor; and for the instant he caught a
vision of a steam yacht.  There were other writers who possessed steam
yachts.  Of course, he cautioned himself, it would be slow succeeding at
first, and for a time he would be content to earn enough money by his
writing to enable him to go on studying.  And then, after some time,--a
very indeterminate time,--when he had learned and prepared himself, he
would write the great things and his name would be on all men's lips.  But
greater than that, infinitely greater and greatest of all, he would have
proved himself worthy of Ruth.  Fame was all very well, but it was for
Ruth that his splendid dream arose.  He was not a fame-monger, but merely
one of God's mad lovers.

Arrived in Oakland, with his snug pay-day in his pocket, he took up his
old room at Bernard Higginbotham's and set to work.  He did not even let
Ruth know he was back.  He would go and see her when he finished the
article on the treasure-hunters.  It was not so difficult to abstain from
seeing her, because of the violent heat of creative fever that burned in
him.  Besides, the very article he was writing would bring her nearer to
him.  He did not know how long an article he should write, but he counted
the words in a double-page article in the Sunday supplement of the San
Francisco Examiner, and guided himself by that.  Three days, at white
heat, completed his narrative; but when he had copied it carefully, in a
large scrawl that was easy to read, he learned from a rhetoric he picked
up in the library that there were such things as paragraphs and quotation
marks.  He had never thought of such things before; and he promptly set
to work writing the article over, referring continually to the pages of
the rhetoric and learning more in a day about composition than the
average schoolboy in a year.  When he had copied the article a second
time and rolled it up carefully, he read in a newspaper an item on hints
to beginners, and discovered the iron law that manuscripts should never
be rolled and that they should be written on one side of the paper.  He
had violated the law on both counts.  Also, he learned from the item that
first-class papers paid a minimum of ten dollars a column.  So, while he
copied the manuscript a third time, he consoled himself by multiplying
ten columns by ten dollars.  The product was always the same, one hundred
dollars, and he decided that that was better than seafaring.  If it
hadn't been for his blunders, he would have finished the article in three
days.  One hundred dollars in three days!  It would have taken him three
months and longer on the sea to earn a similar amount.  A man was a fool
to go to sea when he could write, he concluded, though the money in
itself meant nothing to him.  Its value was in the liberty it would get
him, the presentable garments it would buy him, all of which would bring
him nearer, swiftly nearer, to the slender, pale girl who had turned his
life back upon itself and given him inspiration.

He mailed the manuscript in a flat envelope, and addressed it to the
editor of the San Francisco Examiner.  He had an idea that anything
accepted by a paper was published immediately, and as he had sent the
manuscript in on Friday he expected it to come out on the following
Sunday.  He conceived that it would be fine to let that event apprise
Ruth of his return.  Then, Sunday afternoon, he would call and see her.
In the meantime he was occupied by another idea, which he prided himself
upon as being a particularly sane, careful, and modest idea.  He would
write an adventure story for boys and sell it to The Youth's Companion.
He went to the free reading-room and looked through the files of The
Youth's Companion.  Serial stories, he found, were usually published in
that weekly in five instalments of about three thousand words each.  He
discovered several serials that ran to seven instalments, and decided to
write one of that length.

He had been on a whaling voyage in the Arctic, once--a voyage that was to
have been for three years and which had terminated in shipwreck at the
end of six months.  While his imagination was fanciful, even fantastic at
times, he had a basic love of reality that compelled him to write about
the things he knew.  He knew whaling, and out of the real materials of
his knowledge he proceeded to manufacture the fictitious adventures of
the two boys he intended to use as joint heroes.  It was easy work, he
decided on Saturday evening.  He had completed on that day the first
instalment of three thousand words--much to the amusement of Jim, and to
the open derision of Mr. Higginbotham, who sneered throughout meal-time
at the "litery" person they had discovered in the family.

Martin contented himself by picturing his brother-in-law's surprise on
Sunday morning when he opened his Examiner and saw the article on the
treasure-hunters.  Early that morning he was out himself to the front
door, nervously racing through the many-sheeted newspaper.  He went
through it a second time, very carefully, then folded it up and left it
where he had found it.  He was glad he had not told any one about his
article.  On second thought he concluded that he had been wrong about the
speed with which things found their way into newspaper columns.  Besides,
there had not been any news value in his article, and most likely the
editor would write to him about it first.

After breakfast he went on with his serial.  The words flowed from his
pen, though he broke off from the writing frequently to look up
definitions in the dictionary or to refer to the rhetoric.  He often read
or re-read a chapter at a time, during such pauses; and he consoled
himself that while he was not writing the great things he felt to be in
him, he was learning composition, at any rate, and training himself to
shape up and express his thoughts.  He toiled on till dark, when he went
out to the reading-room and explored magazines and weeklies until the
place closed at ten o'clock.  This was his programme for a week.  Each
day he did three thousand words, and each evening he puzzled his way
through the magazines, taking note of the stories, articles, and poems
that editors saw fit to publish.  One thing was certain: What these
multitudinous writers did he could do, and only give him time and he
would do what they could not do.  He was cheered to read in Book News, in
a paragraph on the payment of magazine writers, not that Rudyard Kipling
received a dollar per word, but that the minimum rate paid by first-class
magazines was two cents a word.  The Youth's Companion was certainly
first class, and at that rate the three thousand words he had written
that day would bring him sixty dollars--two months' wages on the sea!

On Friday night he finished the serial, twenty-one thousand words long.
At two cents a word, he calculated, that would bring him four hundred and
twenty dollars.  Not a bad week's work.  It was more money than he had
ever possessed at one time.  He did not know how he could spend it all.
He had tapped a gold mine.  Where this came from he could always get
more.  He planned to buy some more clothes, to subscribe to many
magazines, and to buy dozens of reference books that at present he was
compelled to go to the library to consult.  And still there was a large
portion of the four hundred and twenty dollars unspent.  This worried him
until the thought came to him of hiring a servant for Gertrude and of
buying a bicycle for Marion.

He mailed the bulky manuscript to The Youth's Companion, and on Saturday
afternoon, after having planned an article on pearl-diving, he went to
see Ruth.  He had telephoned, and she went herself to greet him at the
door.  The old familiar blaze of health rushed out from him and struck
her like a blow.  It seemed to enter into her body and course through her
veins in a liquid glow, and to set her quivering with its imparted
strength.  He flushed warmly as he took her hand and looked into her blue
eyes, but the fresh bronze of eight months of sun hid the flush, though
it did not protect the neck from the gnawing chafe of the stiff collar.
She noted the red line of it with amusement which quickly vanished as she
glanced at his clothes.  They really fitted him,--it was his first made-
to-order suit,--and he seemed slimmer and better modelled.  In addition,
his cloth cap had been replaced by a soft hat, which she commanded him to
put on and then complimented him on his appearance.  She did not remember
when she had felt so happy.  This change in him was her handiwork, and
she was proud of it and fired with ambition further to help him.

But the most radical change of all, and the one that pleased her most,
was the change in his speech.  Not only did he speak more correctly, but
he spoke more easily, and there were many new words in his vocabulary.
When he grew excited or enthusiastic, however, he dropped back into the
old slurring and the dropping of final consonants.  Also, there was an
awkward hesitancy, at times, as he essayed the new words he had learned.
On the other hand, along with his ease of expression, he displayed a
lightness and facetiousness of thought that delighted her.  It was his
old spirit of humor and badinage that had made him a favorite in his own
class, but which he had hitherto been unable to use in her presence
through lack of words and training.  He was just beginning to orientate
himself and to feel that he was not wholly an intruder.  But he was very
tentative, fastidiously so, letting Ruth set the pace of sprightliness
and fancy, keeping up with her but never daring to go beyond her.

He told her of what he had been doing, and of his plan to write for a
livelihood and of going on with his studies.  But he was disappointed at
her lack of approval.  She did not think much of his plan.

"You see," she said frankly, "writing must be a trade, like anything
else.  Not that I know anything about it, of course.  I only bring common
judgment to bear.  You couldn't hope to be a blacksmith without spending
three years at learning the trade--or is it five years!  Now writers are
so much better paid than blacksmiths that there must be ever so many more
men who would like to write, who--try to write."

"But then, may not I be peculiarly constituted to write?" he queried,
secretly exulting at the language he had used, his swift imagination
throwing the whole scene and atmosphere upon a vast screen along with a
thousand other scenes from his life--scenes that were rough and raw,
gross and bestial.

The whole composite vision was achieved with the speed of light,
producing no pause in the conversation, nor interrupting his calm train
of thought.  On the screen of his imagination he saw himself and this
sweet and beautiful girl, facing each other and conversing in good
English, in a room of books and paintings and tone and culture, and all
illuminated by a bright light of steadfast brilliance; while ranged about
and fading away to the remote edges of the screen were antithetical
scenes, each scene a picture, and he the onlooker, free to look at will
upon what he wished.  He saw these other scenes through drifting vapors
and swirls of sullen fog dissolving before shafts of red and garish
light.  He saw cowboys at the bar, drinking fierce whiskey, the air
filled with obscenity and ribald language, and he saw himself with them
drinking and cursing with the wildest, or sitting at table with them,
under smoking kerosene lamps, while the chips clicked and clattered and
the cards were dealt around.  He saw himself, stripped to the waist, with
naked fists, fighting his great fight with Liverpool Red in the
forecastle of the Susquehanna; and he saw the bloody deck of the John
Rogers, that gray morning of attempted mutiny, the mate kicking in death-
throes on the main-hatch, the revolver in the old man's hand spitting
fire and smoke, the men with passion-wrenched faces, of brutes screaming
vile blasphemies and falling about him--and then he returned to the
central scene, calm and clean in the steadfast light, where Ruth sat and
talked with him amid books and paintings; and he saw the grand piano upon
which she would later play to him; and he heard the echoes of his own
selected and correct words, "But then, may I not be peculiarly
constituted to write?"

"But no matter how peculiarly constituted a man may be for
blacksmithing," she was laughing, "I never heard of one becoming a
blacksmith without first serving his apprenticeship."

"What would you advise?" he asked.  "And don't forget that I feel in me
this capacity to write--I can't explain it; I just know that it is in
me."

"You must get a thorough education," was the answer, "whether or not you
ultimately become a writer.  This education is indispensable for whatever
career you select, and it must not be slipshod or sketchy.  You should go
to high school."

"Yes--" he began; but she interrupted with an afterthought:-

"Of course, you could go on with your writing, too."

"I would have to," he said grimly.

"Why?"  She looked at him, prettily puzzled, for she did not quite like
the persistence with which he clung to his notion.

"Because, without writing there wouldn't be any high school.  I must live
and buy books and clothes, you know."

"I'd forgotten that," she laughed.  "Why weren't you born with an
income?"

"I'd rather have good health and imagination," he answered.  "I can make
good on the income, but the other things have to be made good for--"  He
almost said "you," then amended his sentence to, "have to be made good
for one."

"Don't say 'make good,'" she cried, sweetly petulant.  "It's slang, and
it's horrid."

He flushed, and stammered, "That's right, and I only wish you'd correct
me every time."

"I--I'd like to," she said haltingly.  "You have so much in you that is
good that I want to see you perfect."

He was clay in her hands immediately, as passionately desirous of being
moulded by her as she was desirous of shaping him into the image of her
ideal of man.  And when she pointed out the opportuneness of the time,
that the entrance examinations to high school began on the following
Monday, he promptly volunteered that he would take them.

Then she played and sang to him, while he gazed with hungry yearning at
her, drinking in her loveliness and marvelling that there should not be a
hundred suitors listening there and longing for her as he listened and
longed.


