

CHAPTER X


He stopped to dinner that evening, and, much to Ruth's satisfaction, made
a favorable impression on her father.  They talked about the sea as a
career, a subject which Martin had at his finger-ends, and Mr. Morse
remarked afterward that he seemed a very clear-headed young man.  In his
avoidance of slang and his search after right words, Martin was compelled
to talk slowly, which enabled him to find the best thoughts that were in
him.  He was more at ease than that first night at dinner, nearly a year
before, and his shyness and modesty even commended him to Mrs. Morse, who
was pleased at his manifest improvement.

"He is the first man that ever drew passing notice from Ruth," she told
her husband.  "She has been so singularly backward where men are
concerned that I have been worried greatly."

Mr. Morse looked at his wife curiously.

"You mean to use this young sailor to wake her up?" he questioned.

"I mean that she is not to die an old maid if I can help it," was the
answer.  "If this young Eden can arouse her interest in mankind in
general, it will be a good thing."

"A very good thing," he commented.  "But suppose,--and we must suppose,
sometimes, my dear,--suppose he arouses her interest too particularly in
him?"

"Impossible," Mrs. Morse laughed.  "She is three years older than he,
and, besides, it is impossible.  Nothing will ever come of it.  Trust
that to me."

And so Martin's role was arranged for him, while he, led on by Arthur and
Norman, was meditating an extravagance.  They were going out for a ride
into the hills Sunday morning on their wheels, which did not interest
Martin until he learned that Ruth, too, rode a wheel and was going along.
He did not ride, nor own a wheel, but if Ruth rode, it was up to him to
begin, was his decision; and when he said good night, he stopped in at a
cyclery on his way home and spent forty dollars for a wheel.  It was more
than a month's hard-earned wages, and it reduced his stock of money
amazingly; but when he added the hundred dollars he was to receive from
the Examiner to the four hundred and twenty dollars that was the least
The Youth's Companion could pay him, he felt that he had reduced the
perplexity the unwonted amount of money had caused him.  Nor did he mind,
in the course of learning to ride the wheel home, the fact that he ruined
his suit of clothes.  He caught the tailor by telephone that night from
Mr. Higginbotham's store and ordered another suit.  Then he carried the
wheel up the narrow stairway that clung like a fire-escape to the rear
wall of the building, and when he had moved his bed out from the wall,
found there was just space enough in the small room for himself and the
wheel.

Sunday he had intended to devote to studying for the high school
examination, but the pearl-diving article lured him away, and he spent
the day in the white-hot fever of re-creating the beauty and romance that
burned in him.  The fact that the Examiner of that morning had failed to
publish his treasure-hunting article did not dash his spirits.  He was at
too great a height for that, and having been deaf to a twice-repeated
summons, he went without the heavy Sunday dinner with which Mr.
Higginbotham invariably graced his table.  To Mr. Higginbotham such a
dinner was advertisement of his worldly achievement and prosperity, and
he honored it by delivering platitudinous sermonettes upon American
institutions and the opportunity said institutions gave to any
hard-working man to rise--the rise, in his case, which he pointed out
unfailingly, being from a grocer's clerk to the ownership of
Higginbotham's Cash Store.

Martin Eden looked with a sigh at his unfinished "Pearl-diving" on Monday
morning, and took the car down to Oakland to the high school.  And when,
days later, he applied for the results of his examinations, he learned
that he had failed in everything save grammar.

"Your grammar is excellent," Professor Hilton informed him, staring at
him through heavy spectacles; "but you know nothing, positively nothing,
in the other branches, and your United States history is abominable--there
is no other word for it, abominable.  I should advise you--"

Professor Hilton paused and glared at him, unsympathetic and
unimaginative as one of his own test-tubes.  He was professor of physics
in the high school, possessor of a large family, a meagre salary, and a
select fund of parrot-learned knowledge.

"Yes, sir," Martin said humbly, wishing somehow that the man at the desk
in the library was in Professor Hilton's place just then.

"And I should advise you to go back to the grammar school for at least
two years.  Good day."

Martin was not deeply affected by his failure, though he was surprised at
Ruth's shocked expression when he told her Professor Hilton's advice.  Her
disappointment was so evident that he was sorry he had failed, but
chiefly so for her sake.

"You see I was right," she said.  "You know far more than any of the
students entering high school, and yet you can't pass the examinations.
It is because what education you have is fragmentary, sketchy.  You need
the discipline of study, such as only skilled teachers can give you.  You
must be thoroughly grounded.  Professor Hilton is right, and if I were
you, I'd go to night school.  A year and a half of it might enable you to
catch up that additional six months.  Besides, that would leave you your
days in which to write, or, if you could not make your living by your
pen, you would have your days in which to work in some position."

But if my days are taken up with work and my nights with school, when am
I going to see you?--was Martin's first thought, though he refrained from
uttering it.  Instead, he said:-

"It seems so babyish for me to be going to night school.  But I wouldn't
mind that if I thought it would pay.  But I don't think it will pay.  I
can do the work quicker than they can teach me.  It would be a loss of
time--" he thought of her and his desire to have her--"and I can't afford
the time.  I haven't the time to spare, in fact."

"There is so much that is necessary."  She looked at him gently, and he
was a brute to oppose her.  "Physics and chemistry--you can't do them
without laboratory study; and you'll find algebra and geometry almost
hopeless without instruction.  You need the skilled teachers, the
specialists in the art of imparting knowledge."

He was silent for a minute, casting about for the least vainglorious way
in which to express himself.

"Please don't think I'm bragging," he began.  "I don't intend it that way
at all.  But I have a feeling that I am what I may call a natural
student.  I can study by myself.  I take to it kindly, like a duck to
water.  You see yourself what I did with grammar.  And I've learned much
of other things--you would never dream how much.  And I'm only getting
started.  Wait till I get--"  He hesitated and assured himself of the
pronunciation before he said "momentum.  I'm getting my first real feel
of things now.  I'm beginning to size up the situation--"

"Please don't say 'size up,'" she interrupted.

"To get a line on things," he hastily amended.

"That doesn't mean anything in correct English," she objected.

He floundered for a fresh start.

"What I'm driving at is that I'm beginning to get the lay of the land."

Out of pity she forebore, and he went on.

"Knowledge seems to me like a chart-room.  Whenever I go into the
library, I am impressed that way.  The part played by teachers is to
teach the student the contents of the chart-room in a systematic way.  The
teachers are guides to the chart-room, that's all.  It's not something
that they have in their own heads.  They don't make it up, don't create
it.  It's all in the chart-room and they know their way about in it, and
it's their business to show the place to strangers who might else get
lost.  Now I don't get lost easily.  I have the bump of location.  I
usually know where I'm at--What's wrong now?"

"Don't say 'where I'm at.'"

"That's right," he said gratefully, "where I am.  But where am I at--I
mean, where am I?  Oh, yes, in the chart-room.  Well, some people--"

"Persons," she corrected.

"Some persons need guides, most persons do; but I think I can get along
without them.  I've spent a lot of time in the chart-room now, and I'm on
the edge of knowing my way about, what charts I want to refer to, what
coasts I want to explore.  And from the way I line it up, I'll explore a
whole lot more quickly by myself.  The speed of a fleet, you know, is the
speed of the slowest ship, and the speed of the teachers is affected the
same way.  They can't go any faster than the ruck of their scholars, and
I can set a faster pace for myself than they set for a whole schoolroom."

"'He travels the fastest who travels alone,'" she quoted at him.

But I'd travel faster with you just the same, was what he wanted to blurt
out, as he caught a vision of a world without end of sunlit spaces and
starry voids through which he drifted with her, his arm around her, her
pale gold hair blowing about his face.  In the same instant he was aware
of the pitiful inadequacy of speech.  God!  If he could so frame words
that she could see what he then saw!  And he felt the stir in him, like a
throe of yearning pain, of the desire to paint these visions that flashed
unsummoned on the mirror of his mind.  Ah, that was it!  He caught at the
hem of the secret.  It was the very thing that the great writers and
master-poets did.  That was why they were giants.  They knew how to
express what they thought, and felt, and saw.  Dogs asleep in the sun
often whined and barked, but they were unable to tell what they saw that
made them whine and bark.  He had often wondered what it was.  And that
was all he was, a dog asleep in the sun.  He saw noble and beautiful
visions, but he could only whine and bark at Ruth.  But he would cease
sleeping in the sun.  He would stand up, with open eyes, and he would
struggle and toil and learn until, with eyes unblinded and tongue untied,
he could share with her his visioned wealth.  Other men had discovered
the trick of expression, of making words obedient servitors, and of
making combinations of words mean more than the sum of their separate
meanings.  He was stirred profoundly by the passing glimpse at the
secret, and he was again caught up in the vision of sunlit spaces and
starry voids--until it came to him that it was very quiet, and he saw
Ruth regarding him with an amused expression and a smile in her eyes.

"I have had a great visioning," he said, and at the sound of his words in
his own ears his heart gave a leap.  Where had those words come from?
They had adequately expressed the pause his vision had put in the
conversation.  It was a miracle.  Never had he so loftily framed a lofty
thought.  But never had he attempted to frame lofty thoughts in words.
That was it.  That explained it.  He had never tried.  But Swinburne had,
and Tennyson, and Kipling, and all the other poets.  His mind flashed on
to his "Pearl-diving."  He had never dared the big things, the spirit of
the beauty that was a fire in him.  That article would be a different
thing when he was done with it.  He was appalled by the vastness of the
beauty that rightfully belonged in it, and again his mind flashed and
dared, and he demanded of himself why he could not chant that beauty in
noble verse as the great poets did.  And there was all the mysterious
delight and spiritual wonder of his love for Ruth.  Why could he not
chant that, too, as the poets did?  They had sung of love.  So would he.
By God!--

And in his frightened ears he heard his exclamation echoing.  Carried
away, he had breathed it aloud.  The blood surged into his face, wave
upon wave, mastering the bronze of it till the blush of shame flaunted
itself from collar-rim to the roots of his hair.

"I--I--beg your pardon," he stammered.  "I was thinking."

"It sounded as if you were praying," she said bravely, but she felt
herself inside to be withering and shrinking.  It was the first time she
had heard an oath from the lips of a man she knew, and she was shocked,
not merely as a matter of principle and training, but shocked in spirit
by this rough blast of life in the garden of her sheltered maidenhood.

But she forgave, and with surprise at the ease of her forgiveness.
Somehow it was not so difficult to forgive him anything.  He had not had
a chance to be as other men, and he was trying so hard, and succeeding,
too.  It never entered her head that there could be any other reason for
her being kindly disposed toward him.  She was tenderly disposed toward
him, but she did not know it.  She had no way of knowing it.  The placid
poise of twenty-four years without a single love affair did not fit her
with a keen perception of her own feelings, and she who had never warmed
to actual love was unaware that she was warming now.


