

CHAPTER XI


Martin went back to his pearl-diving article, which would have been
finished sooner if it had not been broken in upon so frequently by his
attempts to write poetry.  His poems were love poems, inspired by Ruth,
but they were never completed.  Not in a day could he learn to chant in
noble verse.  Rhyme and metre and structure were serious enough in
themselves, but there was, over and beyond them, an intangible and
evasive something that he caught in all great poetry, but which he could
not catch and imprison in his own.  It was the elusive spirit of poetry
itself that he sensed and sought after but could not capture.  It seemed
a glow to him, a warm and trailing vapor, ever beyond his reaching,
though sometimes he was rewarded by catching at shreds of it and weaving
them into phrases that echoed in his brain with haunting notes or drifted
across his vision in misty wafture of unseen beauty.  It was baffling.  He
ached with desire to express and could but gibber prosaically as
everybody gibbered.  He read his fragments aloud.  The metre marched
along on perfect feet, and the rhyme pounded a longer and equally
faultless rhythm, but the glow and high exaltation that he felt within
were lacking.  He could not understand, and time and again, in despair,
defeated and depressed, he returned to his article.  Prose was certainly
an easier medium.

Following the "Pearl-diving," he wrote an article on the sea as a career,
another on turtle-catching, and a third on the northeast trades.  Then he
tried, as an experiment, a short story, and before he broke his stride he
had finished six short stories and despatched them to various magazines.
He wrote prolifically, intensely, from morning till night, and late at
night, except when he broke off to go to the reading-room, draw books
from the library, or to call on Ruth.  He was profoundly happy.  Life was
pitched high.  He was in a fever that never broke.  The joy of creation
that is supposed to belong to the gods was his.  All the life about
him--the odors of stale vegetables and soapsuds, the slatternly form of
his sister, and the jeering face of Mr. Higginbotham--was a dream.  The
real world was in his mind, and the stories he wrote were so many pieces
of reality out of his mind.

The days were too short.  There was so much he wanted to study.  He cut
his sleep down to five hours and found that he could get along upon it.
He tried four hours and a half, and regretfully came back to five.  He
could joyfully have spent all his waking hours upon any one of his
pursuits.  It was with regret that he ceased from writing to study, that
he ceased from study to go to the library, that he tore himself away from
that chart-room of knowledge or from the magazines in the reading-room
that were filled with the secrets of writers who succeeded in selling
their wares.  It was like severing heart strings, when he was with Ruth,
to stand up and go; and he scorched through the dark streets so as to get
home to his books at the least possible expense of time.  And hardest of
all was it to shut up the algebra or physics, put note-book and pencil
aside, and close his tired eyes in sleep.  He hated the thought of
ceasing to live, even for so short a time, and his sole consolation was
that the alarm clock was set five hours ahead.  He would lose only five
hours anyway, and then the jangling bell would jerk him out of
unconsciousness and he would have before him another glorious day of
nineteen hours.

In the meantime the weeks were passing, his money was ebbing low, and
there was no money coming in.  A month after he had mailed it, the
adventure serial for boys was returned to him by The Youth's Companion.
The rejection slip was so tactfully worded that he felt kindly toward the
editor.  But he did not feel so kindly toward the editor of the San
Francisco Examiner.  After waiting two whole weeks, Martin had written to
him.  A week later he wrote again.  At the end of the month, he went over
to San Francisco and personally called upon the editor.  But he did not
meet that exalted personage, thanks to a Cerberus of an office boy, of
tender years and red hair, who guarded the portals.  At the end of the
fifth week the manuscript came back to him, by mail, without comment.
There was no rejection slip, no explanation, nothing.  In the same way
his other articles were tied up with the other leading San Francisco
papers.  When he recovered them, he sent them to the magazines in the
East, from which they were returned more promptly, accompanied always by
the printed rejection slips.

The short stories were returned in similar fashion.  He read them over
and over, and liked them so much that he could not puzzle out the cause
of their rejection, until, one day, he read in a newspaper that
manuscripts should always be typewritten.  That explained it.  Of course
editors were so busy that they could not afford the time and strain of
reading handwriting.  Martin rented a typewriter and spent a day
mastering the machine.  Each day he typed what he composed, and he typed
his earlier manuscripts as fast as they were returned him.  He was
surprised when the typed ones began to come back.  His jaw seemed to
become squarer, his chin more aggressive, and he bundled the manuscripts
off to new editors.

The thought came to him that he was not a good judge of his own work.  He
tried it out on Gertrude.  He read his stories aloud to her.  Her eyes
glistened, and she looked at him proudly as she said:-

"Ain't it grand, you writin' those sort of things."

"Yes, yes," he demanded impatiently.  "But the story--how did you like
it?"

"Just grand," was the reply.  "Just grand, an' thrilling, too.  I was all
worked up."

He could see that her mind was not clear.  The perplexity was strong in
her good-natured face.  So he waited.

"But, say, Mart," after a long pause, "how did it end?  Did that young
man who spoke so highfalutin' get her?"

And, after he had explained the end, which he thought he had made
artistically obvious, she would say:-

"That's what I wanted to know.  Why didn't you write that way in the
story?"

One thing he learned, after he had read her a number of stories, namely,
that she liked happy endings.

"That story was perfectly grand," she announced, straightening up from
the wash-tub with a tired sigh and wiping the sweat from her forehead
with a red, steamy hand; "but it makes me sad.  I want to cry.  There is
too many sad things in the world anyway.  It makes me happy to think
about happy things.  Now if he'd married her, and--You don't mind, Mart?"
she queried apprehensively.  "I just happen to feel that way, because I'm
tired, I guess.  But the story was grand just the same, perfectly grand.
Where are you goin' to sell it?"

"That's a horse of another color," he laughed.

"But if you _did_ sell it, what do you think you'd get for it?"

"Oh, a hundred dollars.  That would be the least, the way prices go."

"My!  I do hope you'll sell it!"

"Easy money, eh?"  Then he added proudly: "I wrote it in two days.  That's
fifty dollars a day."

He longed to read his stories to Ruth, but did not dare.  He would wait
till some were published, he decided, then she would understand what he
had been working for.  In the meantime he toiled on.  Never had the
spirit of adventure lured him more strongly than on this amazing
exploration of the realm of mind.  He bought the text-books on physics
and chemistry, and, along with his algebra, worked out problems and
demonstrations.  He took the laboratory proofs on faith, and his intense
power of vision enabled him to see the reactions of chemicals more
understandingly than the average student saw them in the laboratory.
Martin wandered on through the heavy pages, overwhelmed by the clews he
was getting to the nature of things.  He had accepted the world as the
world, but now he was comprehending the organization of it, the play and
interplay of force and matter.  Spontaneous explanations of old matters
were continually arising in his mind.  Levers and purchases fascinated
him, and his mind roved backward to hand-spikes and blocks and tackles at
sea.  The theory of navigation, which enabled the ships to travel
unerringly their courses over the pathless ocean, was made clear to him.
The mysteries of storm, and rain, and tide were revealed, and the reason
for the existence of trade-winds made him wonder whether he had written
his article on the northeast trade too soon.  At any rate he knew he
could write it better now.  One afternoon he went out with Arthur to the
University of California, and, with bated breath and a feeling of
religious awe, went through the laboratories, saw demonstrations, and
listened to a physics professor lecturing to his classes.

But he did not neglect his writing.  A stream of short stories flowed
from his pen, and he branched out into the easier forms of verse--the
kind he saw printed in the magazines--though he lost his head and wasted
two weeks on a tragedy in blank verse, the swift rejection of which, by
half a dozen magazines, dumfounded him.  Then he discovered Henley and
wrote a series of sea-poems on the model of "Hospital Sketches."  They
were simple poems, of light and color, and romance and adventure.  "Sea
Lyrics," he called them, and he judged them to be the best work he had
yet done.  There were thirty, and he completed them in a month, doing one
a day after having done his regular day's work on fiction, which day's
work was the equivalent to a week's work of the average successful
writer.  The toil meant nothing to him.  It was not toil.  He was finding
speech, and all the beauty and wonder that had been pent for years behind
his inarticulate lips was now pouring forth in a wild and virile flood.

He showed the "Sea Lyrics" to no one, not even to the editors.  He had
become distrustful of editors.  But it was not distrust that prevented
him from submitting the "Lyrics."  They were so beautiful to him that he
was impelled to save them to share with Ruth in some glorious, far-off
time when he would dare to read to her what he had written.  Against that
time he kept them with him, reading them aloud, going over them until he
knew them by heart.

He lived every moment of his waking hours, and he lived in his sleep, his
subjective mind rioting through his five hours of surcease and combining
the thoughts and events of the day into grotesque and impossible marvels.
In reality, he never rested, and a weaker body or a less firmly poised
brain would have been prostrated in a general break-down.  His late
afternoon calls on Ruth were rarer now, for June was approaching, when
she would take her degree and finish with the university.  Bachelor of
Arts!--when he thought of her degree, it seemed she fled beyond him
faster than he could pursue.

One afternoon a week she gave to him, and arriving late, he usually
stayed for dinner and for music afterward.  Those were his red-letter
days.  The atmosphere of the house, in such contrast with that in which
he lived, and the mere nearness to her, sent him forth each time with a
firmer grip on his resolve to climb the heights.  In spite of the beauty
in him, and the aching desire to create, it was for her that he
struggled.  He was a lover first and always.  All other things he
subordinated to love.

Greater than his adventure in the world of thought was his
love-adventure.  The world itself was not so amazing because of the atoms
and molecules that composed it according to the propulsions of
irresistible force; what made it amazing was the fact that Ruth lived in
it.  She was the most amazing thing he had ever known, or dreamed, or
guessed.

But he was oppressed always by her remoteness.  She was so far from him,
and he did not know how to approach her.  He had been a success with
girls and women in his own class; but he had never loved any of them,
while he did love her, and besides, she was not merely of another class.
His very love elevated her above all classes.  She was a being apart, so
far apart that he did not know how to draw near to her as a lover should
draw near.  It was true, as he acquired knowledge and language, that he
was drawing nearer, talking her speech, discovering ideas and delights in
common; but this did not satisfy his lover's yearning.  His lover's
imagination had made her holy, too holy, too spiritualized, to have any
kinship with him in the flesh.  It was his own love that thrust her from
him and made her seem impossible for him.  Love itself denied him the one
thing that it desired.

And then, one day, without warning, the gulf between them was bridged for
a moment, and thereafter, though the gulf remained, it was ever narrower.
They had been eating cherries--great, luscious, black cherries with a
juice of the color of dark wine.  And later, as she read aloud to him
from "The Princess," he chanced to notice the stain of the cherries on
her lips.  For the moment her divinity was shattered.  She was clay,
after all, mere clay, subject to the common law of clay as his clay was
subject, or anybody's clay.  Her lips were flesh like his, and cherries
dyed them as cherries dyed his.  And if so with her lips, then was it so
with all of her.  She was woman, all woman, just like any woman.  It came
upon him abruptly.  It was a revelation that stunned him.  It was as if
he had seen the sun fall out of the sky, or had seen worshipped purity
polluted.

Then he realized the significance of it, and his heart began pounding and
challenging him to play the lover with this woman who was not a spirit
from other worlds but a mere woman with lips a cherry could stain.  He
trembled at the audacity of his thought; but all his soul was singing,
and reason, in a triumphant paean, assured him he was right.  Something
of this change in him must have reached her, for she paused from her
reading, looked up at him, and smiled.  His eyes dropped from her blue
eyes to her lips, and the sight of the stain maddened him.  His arms all
but flashed out to her and around her, in the way of his old careless
life.  She seemed to lean toward him, to wait, and all his will fought to
hold him back.

"You were not following a word," she pouted.

Then she laughed at him, delighting in his confusion, and as he looked
into her frank eyes and knew that she had divined nothing of what he
felt, he became abashed.  He had indeed in thought dared too far.  Of all
the women he had known there was no woman who would not have guessed--save
her.  And she had not guessed.  There was the difference.  She was
different.  He was appalled by his own grossness, awed by her clear
innocence, and he gazed again at her across the gulf.  The bridge had
broken down.

But still the incident had brought him nearer.  The memory of it
persisted, and in the moments when he was most cast down, he dwelt upon
it eagerly.  The gulf was never again so wide.  He had accomplished a
distance vastly greater than a bachelorship of arts, or a dozen
bachelorships.  She was pure, it was true, as he had never dreamed of
purity; but cherries stained her lips.  She was subject to the laws of
the universe just as inexorably as he was.  She had to eat to live, and
when she got her feet wet, she caught cold.  But that was not the point.
If she could feel hunger and thirst, and heat and cold, then could she
feel love--and love for a man.  Well, he was a man.  And why could he not
be the man?  "It's up to me to make good," he would murmur fervently.  "I
will be _the_ man.  I will make myself _the_ man.  I will make good."


