

CHAPTER XII


Early one evening, struggling with a sonnet that twisted all awry the
beauty and thought that trailed in glow and vapor through his brain,
Martin was called to the telephone.

"It's a lady's voice, a fine lady's," Mr. Higginbotham, who had called
him, jeered.

Martin went to the telephone in the corner of the room, and felt a wave
of warmth rush through him as he heard Ruth's voice.  In his battle with
the sonnet he had forgotten her existence, and at the sound of her voice
his love for her smote him like a sudden blow.  And such a
voice!--delicate and sweet, like a strain of music heard far off and
faint, or, better, like a bell of silver, a perfect tone, crystal-pure.
No mere woman had a voice like that.  There was something celestial about
it, and it came from other worlds.  He could scarcely hear what it said,
so ravished was he, though he controlled his face, for he knew that Mr.
Higginbotham's ferret eyes were fixed upon him.

It was not much that Ruth wanted to say--merely that Norman had been
going to take her to a lecture that night, but that he had a headache,
and she was so disappointed, and she had the tickets, and that if he had
no other engagement, would he be good enough to take her?

Would he!  He fought to suppress the eagerness in his voice.  It was
amazing.  He had always seen her in her own house.  And he had never
dared to ask her to go anywhere with him.  Quite irrelevantly, still at
the telephone and talking with her, he felt an overpowering desire to die
for her, and visions of heroic sacrifice shaped and dissolved in his
whirling brain.  He loved her so much, so terribly, so hopelessly.  In
that moment of mad happiness that she should go out with him, go to a
lecture with him--with him, Martin Eden--she soared so far above him that
there seemed nothing else for him to do than die for her.  It was the
only fit way in which he could express the tremendous and lofty emotion
he felt for her.  It was the sublime abnegation of true love that comes
to all lovers, and it came to him there, at the telephone, in a whirlwind
of fire and glory; and to die for her, he felt, was to have lived and
loved well.  And he was only twenty-one, and he had never been in love
before.

His hand trembled as he hung up the receiver, and he was weak from the
organ which had stirred him.  His eyes were shining like an angel's, and
his face was transfigured, purged of all earthly dross, and pure and
holy.

"Makin' dates outside, eh?" his brother-in-law sneered.  "You know what
that means.  You'll be in the police court yet."

But Martin could not come down from the height.  Not even the bestiality
of the allusion could bring him back to earth.  Anger and hurt were
beneath him.  He had seen a great vision and was as a god, and he could
feel only profound and awful pity for this maggot of a man.  He did not
look at him, and though his eyes passed over him, he did not see him; and
as in a dream he passed out of the room to dress.  It was not until he
had reached his own room and was tying his necktie that he became aware
of a sound that lingered unpleasantly in his ears.  On investigating this
sound he identified it as the final snort of Bernard Higginbotham, which
somehow had not penetrated to his brain before.

As Ruth's front door closed behind them and he came down the steps with
her, he found himself greatly perturbed.  It was not unalloyed bliss,
taking her to the lecture.  He did not know what he ought to do.  He had
seen, on the streets, with persons of her class, that the women took the
men's arms.  But then, again, he had seen them when they didn't; and he
wondered if it was only in the evening that arms were taken, or only
between husbands and wives and relatives.

Just before he reached the sidewalk, he remembered Minnie.  Minnie had
always been a stickler.  She had called him down the second time she
walked out with him, because he had gone along on the inside, and she had
laid the law down to him that a gentleman always walked on the
outside--when he was with a lady.  And Minnie had made a practice of
kicking his heels, whenever they crossed from one side of the street to
the other, to remind him to get over on the outside.  He wondered where
she had got that item of etiquette, and whether it had filtered down from
above and was all right.

It wouldn't do any harm to try it, he decided, by the time they had
reached the sidewalk; and he swung behind Ruth and took up his station on
the outside.  Then the other problem presented itself.  Should he offer
her his arm?  He had never offered anybody his arm in his life.  The
girls he had known never took the fellows' arms.  For the first several
times they walked freely, side by side, and after that it was arms around
the waists, and heads against the fellows' shoulders where the streets
were unlighted.  But this was different.  She wasn't that kind of a girl.
He must do something.

He crooked the arm next to her--crooked it very slightly and with secret
tentativeness, not invitingly, but just casually, as though he was
accustomed to walk that way.  And then the wonderful thing happened.  He
felt her hand upon his arm.  Delicious thrills ran through him at the
contact, and for a few sweet moments it seemed that he had left the solid
earth and was flying with her through the air.  But he was soon back
again, perturbed by a new complication.  They were crossing the street.
This would put him on the inside.  He should be on the outside.  Should
he therefore drop her arm and change over?  And if he did so, would he
have to repeat the manoeuvre the next time?  And the next?  There was
something wrong about it, and he resolved not to caper about and play the
fool.  Yet he was not satisfied with his conclusion, and when he found
himself on the inside, he talked quickly and earnestly, making a show of
being carried away by what he was saying, so that, in case he was wrong
in not changing sides, his enthusiasm would seem the cause for his
carelessness.

As they crossed Broadway, he came face to face with a new problem.  In
the blaze of the electric lights, he saw Lizzie Connolly and her giggly
friend.  Only for an instant he hesitated, then his hand went up and his
hat came off.  He could not be disloyal to his kind, and it was to more
than Lizzie Connolly that his hat was lifted.  She nodded and looked at
him boldly, not with soft and gentle eyes like Ruth's, but with eyes that
were handsome and hard, and that swept on past him to Ruth and itemized
her face and dress and station.  And he was aware that Ruth looked, too,
with quick eyes that were timid and mild as a dove's, but which saw, in a
look that was a flutter on and past, the working-class girl in her cheap
finery and under the strange hat that all working-class girls were
wearing just then.

"What a pretty girl!" Ruth said a moment later.

Martin could have blessed her, though he said:-

"I don't know.  I guess it's all a matter of personal taste, but she
doesn't strike me as being particularly pretty."

"Why, there isn't one woman in ten thousand with features as regular as
hers.  They are splendid.  Her face is as clear-cut as a cameo.  And her
eyes are beautiful."

"Do you think so?" Martin queried absently, for to him there was only one
beautiful woman in the world, and she was beside him, her hand upon his
arm.

"Do I think so?  If that girl had proper opportunity to dress, Mr. Eden,
and if she were taught how to carry herself, you would be fairly dazzled
by her, and so would all men."

"She would have to be taught how to speak," he commented, "or else most
of the men wouldn't understand her.  I'm sure you couldn't understand a
quarter of what she said if she just spoke naturally."

"Nonsense!  You are as bad as Arthur when you try to make your point."

"You forget how I talked when you first met me.  I have learned a new
language since then.  Before that time I talked as that girl talks.  Now
I can manage to make myself understood sufficiently in your language to
explain that you do not know that other girl's language.  And do you know
why she carries herself the way she does?  I think about such things now,
though I never used to think about them, and I am beginning to
understand--much."

"But why does she?"

"She has worked long hours for years at machines.  When one's body is
young, it is very pliable, and hard work will mould it like putty
according to the nature of the work.  I can tell at a glance the trades
of many workingmen I meet on the street.  Look at me.  Why am I rolling
all about the shop?  Because of the years I put in on the sea.  If I'd
put in the same years cow-punching, with my body young and pliable, I
wouldn't be rolling now, but I'd be bow-legged.  And so with that girl.
You noticed that her eyes were what I might call hard.  She has never
been sheltered.  She has had to take care of herself, and a young girl
can't take care of herself and keep her eyes soft and gentle like--like
yours, for example."

"I think you are right," Ruth said in a low voice.  "And it is too bad.
She is such a pretty girl."

He looked at her and saw her eyes luminous with pity.  And then he
remembered that he loved her and was lost in amazement at his fortune
that permitted him to love her and to take her on his arm to a lecture.

Who are you, Martin Eden? he demanded of himself in the looking-glass,
that night when he got back to his room.  He gazed at himself long and
curiously.  Who are you?  What are you?  Where do you belong?  You belong
by rights to girls like Lizzie Connolly.  You belong with the legions of
toil, with all that is low, and vulgar, and unbeautiful.  You belong with
the oxen and the drudges, in dirty surroundings among smells and
stenches.  There are the stale vegetables now.  Those potatoes are
rotting.  Smell them, damn you, smell them.  And yet you dare to open the
books, to listen to beautiful music, to learn to love beautiful
paintings, to speak good English, to think thoughts that none of your own
kind thinks, to tear yourself away from the oxen and the Lizzie Connollys
and to love a pale spirit of a woman who is a million miles beyond you
and who lives in the stars!  Who are you? and what are you? damn you!  And
are you going to make good?

He shook his fist at himself in the glass, and sat down on the edge of
the bed to dream for a space with wide eyes.  Then he got out note-book
and algebra and lost himself in quadratic equations, while the hours
slipped by, and the stars dimmed, and the gray of dawn flooded against
his window.


