

CHAPTER XIII


It was the knot of wordy socialists and working-class philosophers that
held forth in the City Hall Park on warm afternoons that was responsible
for the great discovery.  Once or twice in the month, while riding
through the park on his way to the library, Martin dismounted from his
wheel and listened to the arguments, and each time he tore himself away
reluctantly.  The tone of discussion was much lower than at Mr. Morse's
table.  The men were not grave and dignified.  They lost their tempers
easily and called one another names, while oaths and obscene allusions
were frequent on their lips.  Once or twice he had seen them come to
blows.  And yet, he knew not why, there seemed something vital about the
stuff of these men's thoughts.  Their logomachy was far more stimulating
to his intellect than the reserved and quiet dogmatism of Mr. Morse.
These men, who slaughtered English, gesticulated like lunatics, and
fought one another's ideas with primitive anger, seemed somehow to be
more alive than Mr. Morse and his crony, Mr. Butler.

Martin had heard Herbert Spencer quoted several times in the park, but
one afternoon a disciple of Spencer's appeared, a seedy tramp with a
dirty coat buttoned tightly at the throat to conceal the absence of a
shirt.  Battle royal was waged, amid the smoking of many cigarettes and
the expectoration of much tobacco-juice, wherein the tramp successfully
held his own, even when a socialist workman sneered, "There is no god but
the Unknowable, and Herbert Spencer is his prophet."  Martin was puzzled
as to what the discussion was about, but when he rode on to the library
he carried with him a new-born interest in Herbert Spencer, and because
of the frequency with which the tramp had mentioned "First Principles,"
Martin drew out that volume.

So the great discovery began.  Once before he had tried Spencer, and
choosing the "Principles of Psychology" to begin with, he had failed as
abjectly as he had failed with Madam Blavatsky.  There had been no
understanding the book, and he had returned it unread.  But this night,
after algebra and physics, and an attempt at a sonnet, he got into bed
and opened "First Principles."  Morning found him still reading.  It was
impossible for him to sleep.  Nor did he write that day.  He lay on the
bed till his body grew tired, when he tried the hard floor, reading on
his back, the book held in the air above him, or changing from side to
side.  He slept that night, and did his writing next morning, and then
the book tempted him and he fell, reading all afternoon, oblivious to
everything and oblivious to the fact that that was the afternoon Ruth
gave to him.  His first consciousness of the immediate world about him
was when Bernard Higginbotham jerked open the door and demanded to know
if he thought they were running a restaurant.

Martin Eden had been mastered by curiosity all his days.  He wanted to
know, and it was this desire that had sent him adventuring over the
world.  But he was now learning from Spencer that he never had known, and
that he never could have known had he continued his sailing and wandering
forever.  He had merely skimmed over the surface of things, observing
detached phenomena, accumulating fragments of facts, making superficial
little generalizations--and all and everything quite unrelated in a
capricious and disorderly world of whim and chance.  The mechanism of the
flight of birds he had watched and reasoned about with understanding; but
it had never entered his head to try to explain the process whereby
birds, as organic flying mechanisms, had been developed.  He had never
dreamed there was such a process.  That birds should have come to be, was
unguessed.  They always had been.  They just happened.

And as it was with birds, so had it been with everything.  His ignorant
and unprepared attempts at philosophy had been fruitless.  The medieval
metaphysics of Kant had given him the key to nothing, and had served the
sole purpose of making him doubt his own intellectual powers.  In similar
manner his attempt to study evolution had been confined to a hopelessly
technical volume by Romanes.  He had understood nothing, and the only
idea he had gathered was that evolution was a dry-as-dust theory, of a
lot of little men possessed of huge and unintelligible vocabularies.  And
now he learned that evolution was no mere theory but an accepted process
of development; that scientists no longer disagreed about it, their only
differences being over the method of evolution.

And here was the man Spencer, organizing all knowledge for him, reducing
everything to unity, elaborating ultimate realities, and presenting to
his startled gaze a universe so concrete of realization that it was like
the model of a ship such as sailors make and put into glass bottles.
There was no caprice, no chance.  All was law.  It was in obedience to
law that the bird flew, and it was in obedience to the same law that
fermenting slime had writhed and squirmed and put out legs and wings and
become a bird.

Martin had ascended from pitch to pitch of intellectual living, and here
he was at a higher pitch than ever.  All the hidden things were laying
their secrets bare.  He was drunken with comprehension.  At night,
asleep, he lived with the gods in colossal nightmare; and awake, in the
day, he went around like a somnambulist, with absent stare, gazing upon
the world he had just discovered.  At table he failed to hear the
conversation about petty and ignoble things, his eager mind seeking out
and following cause and effect in everything before him.  In the meat on
the platter he saw the shining sun and traced its energy back through all
its transformations to its source a hundred million miles away, or traced
its energy ahead to the moving muscles in his arms that enabled him to
cut the meat, and to the brain wherewith he willed the muscles to move to
cut the meat, until, with inward gaze, he saw the same sun shining in his
brain.  He was entranced by illumination, and did not hear the
"Bughouse," whispered by Jim, nor see the anxiety on his sister's face,
nor notice the rotary motion of Bernard Higginbotham's finger, whereby he
imparted the suggestion of wheels revolving in his brother-in-law's head.

What, in a way, most profoundly impressed Martin, was the correlation of
knowledge--of all knowledge.  He had been curious to know things, and
whatever he acquired he had filed away in separate memory compartments in
his brain.  Thus, on the subject of sailing he had an immense store.  On
the subject of woman he had a fairly large store.  But these two subjects
had been unrelated.  Between the two memory compartments there had been
no connection.  That, in the fabric of knowledge, there should be any
connection whatever between a woman with hysterics and a schooner
carrying a weather-helm or heaving to in a gale, would have struck him as
ridiculous and impossible.  But Herbert Spencer had shown him not only
that it was not ridiculous, but that it was impossible for there to be no
connection.  All things were related to all other things from the
farthermost star in the wastes of space to the myriads of atoms in the
grain of sand under one's foot.  This new concept was a perpetual
amazement to Martin, and he found himself engaged continually in tracing
the relationship between all things under the sun and on the other side
of the sun.  He drew up lists of the most incongruous things and was
unhappy until he succeeded in establishing kinship between them
all--kinship between love, poetry, earthquake, fire, rattlesnakes,
rainbows, precious gems, monstrosities, sunsets, the roaring of lions,
illuminating gas, cannibalism, beauty, murder, lovers, fulcrums, and
tobacco.  Thus, he unified the universe and held it up and looked at it,
or wandered through its byways and alleys and jungles, not as a terrified
traveller in the thick of mysteries seeking an unknown goal, but
observing and charting and becoming familiar with all there was to know.
And the more he knew, the more passionately he admired the universe, and
life, and his own life in the midst of it all.

"You fool!" he cried at his image in the looking-glass.  "You wanted to
write, and you tried to write, and you had nothing in you to write about.
What did you have in you?--some childish notions, a few half-baked
sentiments, a lot of undigested beauty, a great black mass of ignorance,
a heart filled to bursting with love, and an ambition as big as your love
and as futile as your ignorance.  And you wanted to write!  Why, you're
just on the edge of beginning to get something in you to write about.  You
wanted to create beauty, but how could you when you knew nothing about
the nature of beauty?  You wanted to write about life when you knew
nothing of the essential characteristics of life.  You wanted to write
about the world and the scheme of existence when the world was a Chinese
puzzle to you and all that you could have written would have been about
what you did not know of the scheme of existence.  But cheer up, Martin,
my boy.  You'll write yet.  You know a little, a very little, and you're
on the right road now to know more.  Some day, if you're lucky, you may
come pretty close to knowing all that may be known.  Then you will
write."

He brought his great discovery to Ruth, sharing with her all his joy and
wonder in it.  But she did not seem to be so enthusiastic over it.  She
tacitly accepted it and, in a way, seemed aware of it from her own
studies.  It did not stir her deeply, as it did him, and he would have
been surprised had he not reasoned it out that it was not new and fresh
to her as it was to him.  Arthur and Norman, he found, believed in
evolution and had read Spencer, though it did not seem to have made any
vital impression upon them, while the young fellow with the glasses and
the mop of hair, Will Olney, sneered disagreeably at Spencer and repeated
the epigram, "There is no god but the Unknowable, and Herbert Spencer is
his prophet."

But Martin forgave him the sneer, for he had begun to discover that Olney
was not in love with Ruth.  Later, he was dumfounded to learn from
various little happenings not only that Olney did not care for Ruth, but
that he had a positive dislike for her.  Martin could not understand
this.  It was a bit of phenomena that he could not correlate with all the
rest of the phenomena in the universe.  But nevertheless he felt sorry
for the young fellow because of the great lack in his nature that
prevented him from a proper appreciation of Ruth's fineness and beauty.
They rode out into the hills several Sundays on their wheels, and Martin
had ample opportunity to observe the armed truce that existed between
Ruth and Olney.  The latter chummed with Norman, throwing Arthur and
Martin into company with Ruth, for which Martin was duly grateful.

Those Sundays were great days for Martin, greatest because he was with
Ruth, and great, also, because they were putting him more on a par with
the young men of her class.  In spite of their long years of disciplined
education, he was finding himself their intellectual equal, and the hours
spent with them in conversation was so much practice for him in the use
of the grammar he had studied so hard.  He had abandoned the etiquette
books, falling back upon observation to show him the right things to do.
Except when carried away by his enthusiasm, he was always on guard,
keenly watchful of their actions and learning their little courtesies and
refinements of conduct.

The fact that Spencer was very little read was for some time a source of
surprise to Martin.  "Herbert Spencer," said the man at the desk in the
library, "oh, yes, a great mind."  But the man did not seem to know
anything of the content of that great mind.  One evening, at dinner, when
Mr. Butler was there, Martin turned the conversation upon Spencer.  Mr.
Morse bitterly arraigned the English philosopher's agnosticism, but
confessed that he had not read "First Principles"; while Mr. Butler
stated that he had no patience with Spencer, had never read a line of
him, and had managed to get along quite well without him.  Doubts arose
in Martin's mind, and had he been less strongly individual he would have
accepted the general opinion and given Herbert Spencer up.  As it was, he
found Spencer's explanation of things convincing; and, as he phrased it
to himself, to give up Spencer would be equivalent to a navigator
throwing the compass and chronometer overboard.  So Martin went on into a
thorough study of evolution, mastering more and more the subject himself,
and being convinced by the corroborative testimony of a thousand
independent writers.  The more he studied, the more vistas he caught of
fields of knowledge yet unexplored, and the regret that days were only
twenty-four hours long became a chronic complaint with him.

One day, because the days were so short, he decided to give up algebra
and geometry.  Trigonometry he had not even attempted.  Then he cut
chemistry from his study-list, retaining only physics.

"I am not a specialist," he said, in defence, to Ruth.  "Nor am I going
to try to be a specialist.  There are too many special fields for any one
man, in a whole lifetime, to master a tithe of them.  I must pursue
general knowledge.  When I need the work of specialists, I shall refer to
their books."

"But that is not like having the knowledge yourself," she protested.

"But it is unnecessary to have it.  We profit from the work of the
specialists.  That's what they are for.  When I came in, I noticed the
chimney-sweeps at work.  They're specialists, and when they get done, you
will enjoy clean chimneys without knowing anything about the construction
of chimneys."

"That's far-fetched, I am afraid."

She looked at him curiously, and he felt a reproach in her gaze and
manner.  But he was convinced of the rightness of his position.

"All thinkers on general subjects, the greatest minds in the world, in
fact, rely on the specialists.  Herbert Spencer did that.  He generalized
upon the findings of thousands of investigators.  He would have had to
live a thousand lives in order to do it all himself.  And so with Darwin.
He took advantage of all that had been learned by the florists and cattle-
breeders."

"You're right, Martin," Olney said.  "You know what you're after, and
Ruth doesn't.  She doesn't know what she is after for herself even."

"--Oh, yes," Olney rushed on, heading off her objection, "I know you call
it general culture.  But it doesn't matter what you study if you want
general culture.  You can study French, or you can study German, or cut
them both out and study Esperanto, you'll get the culture tone just the
same.  You can study Greek or Latin, too, for the same purpose, though it
will never be any use to you.  It will be culture, though.  Why, Ruth
studied Saxon, became clever in it,--that was two years ago,--and all
that she remembers of it now is 'Whan that sweet Aprile with his schowers
soote'--isn't that the way it goes?"

"But it's given you the culture tone just the same," he laughed, again
heading her off.  "I know.  We were in the same classes."

"But you speak of culture as if it should be a means to something," Ruth
cried out.  Her eyes were flashing, and in her cheeks were two spots of
color.  "Culture is the end in itself."

"But that is not what Martin wants."

"How do you know?"

"What do you want, Martin?" Olney demanded, turning squarely upon him.

Martin felt very uncomfortable, and looked entreaty at Ruth.

"Yes, what do you want?" Ruth asked.  "That will settle it."

"Yes, of course, I want culture," Martin faltered.  "I love beauty, and
culture will give me a finer and keener appreciation of beauty."

She nodded her head and looked triumph.

"Rot, and you know it," was Olney's comment.  "Martin's after career, not
culture.  It just happens that culture, in his case, is incidental to
career.  If he wanted to be a chemist, culture would be unnecessary.
Martin wants to write, but he's afraid to say so because it will put you
in the wrong."

"And why does Martin want to write?" he went on.  "Because he isn't
rolling in wealth.  Why do you fill your head with Saxon and general
culture?  Because you don't have to make your way in the world.  Your
father sees to that.  He buys your clothes for you, and all the rest.
What rotten good is our education, yours and mine and Arthur's and
Norman's?  We're soaked in general culture, and if our daddies went broke
to-day, we'd be falling down to-morrow on teachers' examinations.  The
best job you could get, Ruth, would be a country school or music teacher
in a girls' boarding-school."

"And pray what would you do?" she asked.

"Not a blessed thing.  I could earn a dollar and a half a day, common
labor, and I might get in as instructor in Hanley's cramming joint--I say
might, mind you, and I might be chucked out at the end of the week for
sheer inability."

Martin followed the discussion closely, and while he was convinced that
Olney was right, he resented the rather cavalier treatment he accorded
Ruth.  A new conception of love formed in his mind as he listened.  Reason
had nothing to do with love.  It mattered not whether the woman he loved
reasoned correctly or incorrectly.  Love was above reason.  If it just
happened that she did not fully appreciate his necessity for a career,
that did not make her a bit less lovable.  She was all lovable, and what
she thought had nothing to do with her lovableness.

"What's that?" he replied to a question from Olney that broke in upon his
train of thought.

"I was saying that I hoped you wouldn't be fool enough to tackle Latin."

"But Latin is more than culture," Ruth broke in.  "It is equipment."

"Well, are you going to tackle it?" Olney persisted.

Martin was sore beset.  He could see that Ruth was hanging eagerly upon
his answer.

"I am afraid I won't have time," he said finally.  "I'd like to, but I
won't have time."

"You see, Martin's not seeking culture," Olney exulted.  "He's trying to
get somewhere, to do something."

"Oh, but it's mental training.  It's mind discipline.  It's what makes
disciplined minds."  Ruth looked expectantly at Martin, as if waiting for
him to change his judgment.  "You know, the foot-ball players have to
train before the big game.  And that is what Latin does for the thinker.
It trains."

"Rot and bosh!  That's what they told us when we were kids.  But there is
one thing they didn't tell us then.  They let us find it out for
ourselves afterwards."  Olney paused for effect, then added, "And what
they didn't tell us was that every gentleman should have studied Latin,
but that no gentleman should know Latin."

"Now that's unfair," Ruth cried.  "I knew you were turning the
conversation just in order to get off something."

"It's clever all right," was the retort, "but it's fair, too.  The only
men who know their Latin are the apothecaries, the lawyers, and the Latin
professors.  And if Martin wants to be one of them, I miss my guess.  But
what's all that got to do with Herbert Spencer anyway?  Martin's just
discovered Spencer, and he's wild over him.  Why?  Because Spencer is
taking him somewhere.  Spencer couldn't take me anywhere, nor you.  We
haven't got anywhere to go.  You'll get married some day, and I'll have
nothing to do but keep track of the lawyers and business agents who will
take care of the money my father's going to leave me."

Onley got up to go, but turned at the door and delivered a parting shot.

"You leave Martin alone, Ruth.  He knows what's best for himself.  Look
at what he's done already.  He makes me sick sometimes, sick and ashamed
of myself.  He knows more now about the world, and life, and man's place,
and all the rest, than Arthur, or Norman, or I, or you, too, for that
matter, and in spite of all our Latin, and French, and Saxon, and
culture."

"But Ruth is my teacher," Martin answered chivalrously.  "She is
responsible for what little I have learned."

"Rats!"  Olney looked at Ruth, and his expression was malicious.  "I
suppose you'll be telling me next that you read Spencer on her
recommendation--only you didn't.  And she doesn't know anything more
about Darwin and evolution than I do about King Solomon's mines.  What's
that jawbreaker definition about something or other, of Spencer's, that
you sprang on us the other day--that indefinite, incoherent homogeneity
thing?  Spring it on her, and see if she understands a word of it.  That
isn't culture, you see.  Well, tra la, and if you tackle Latin, Martin, I
won't have any respect for you."

And all the while, interested in the discussion, Martin had been aware of
an irk in it as well.  It was about studies and lessons, dealing with the
rudiments of knowledge, and the schoolboyish tone of it conflicted with
the big things that were stirring in him--with the grip upon life that
was even then crooking his fingers like eagle's talons, with the cosmic
thrills that made him ache, and with the inchoate consciousness of
mastery of it all.  He likened himself to a poet, wrecked on the shores
of a strange land, filled with power of beauty, stumbling and stammering
and vainly trying to sing in the rough, barbaric tongue of his brethren
in the new land.  And so with him.  He was alive, painfully alive, to the
great universal things, and yet he was compelled to potter and grope
among schoolboy topics and debate whether or not he should study Latin.

"What in hell has Latin to do with it?" he demanded before his mirror
that night.  "I wish dead people would stay dead.  Why should I and the
beauty in me be ruled by the dead?  Beauty is alive and everlasting.
Languages come and go.  They are the dust of the dead."

And his next thought was that he had been phrasing his ideas very well,
and he went to bed wondering why he could not talk in similar fashion
when he was with Ruth.  He was only a schoolboy, with a schoolboy's
tongue, when he was in her presence.

"Give me time," he said aloud.  "Only give me time."

Time!  Time!  Time! was his unending plaint.


