

CHAPTER XIV


It was not because of Olney, but in spite of Ruth, and his love for Ruth,
that he finally decided not to take up Latin.  His money meant time.
There was so much that was more important than Latin, so many studies
that clamored with imperious voices.  And he must write.  He must earn
money.  He had had no acceptances.  Twoscore of manuscripts were
travelling the endless round of the magazines.  How did the others do it?
He spent long hours in the free reading-room, going over what others had
written, studying their work eagerly and critically, comparing it with
his own, and wondering, wondering, about the secret trick they had
discovered which enabled them to sell their work.

He was amazed at the immense amount of printed stuff that was dead.  No
light, no life, no color, was shot through it.  There was no breath of
life in it, and yet it sold, at two cents a word, twenty dollars a
thousand--the newspaper clipping had said so.  He was puzzled by
countless short stories, written lightly and cleverly he confessed, but
without vitality or reality.  Life was so strange and wonderful, filled
with an immensity of problems, of dreams, and of heroic toils, and yet
these stories dealt only with the commonplaces of life.  He felt the
stress and strain of life, its fevers and sweats and wild
insurgences--surely this was the stuff to write about!  He wanted to
glorify the leaders of forlorn hopes, the mad lovers, the giants that
fought under stress and strain, amid terror and tragedy, making life
crackle with the strength of their endeavor.  And yet the magazine short
stories seemed intent on glorifying the Mr. Butlers, the sordid dollar-
chasers, and the commonplace little love affairs of commonplace little
men and women.  Was it because the editors of the magazines were
commonplace? he demanded.  Or were they afraid of life, these writers and
editors and readers?

But his chief trouble was that he did not know any editors or writers.
And not merely did he not know any writers, but he did not know anybody
who had ever attempted to write.  There was nobody to tell him, to hint
to him, to give him the least word of advice.  He began to doubt that
editors were real men.  They seemed cogs in a machine.  That was what it
was, a machine.  He poured his soul into stories, articles, and poems,
and intrusted them to the machine.  He folded them just so, put the
proper stamps inside the long envelope along with the manuscript, sealed
the envelope, put more stamps outside, and dropped it into the mail-box.
It travelled across the continent, and after a certain lapse of time the
postman returned him the manuscript in another long envelope, on the
outside of which were the stamps he had enclosed.  There was no human
editor at the other end, but a mere cunning arrangement of cogs that
changed the manuscript from one envelope to another and stuck on the
stamps.  It was like the slot machines wherein one dropped pennies, and,
with a metallic whirl of machinery had delivered to him a stick of
chewing-gum or a tablet of chocolate.  It depended upon which slot one
dropped the penny in, whether he got chocolate or gum.  And so with the
editorial machine.  One slot brought checks and the other brought
rejection slips.  So far he had found only the latter slot.

It was the rejection slips that completed the horrible machinelikeness of
the process.  These slips were printed in stereotyped forms and he had
received hundreds of them--as many as a dozen or more on each of his
earlier manuscripts.  If he had received one line, one personal line,
along with one rejection of all his rejections, he would have been
cheered.  But not one editor had given that proof of existence.  And he
could conclude only that there were no warm human men at the other end,
only mere cogs, well oiled and running beautifully in the machine.

He was a good fighter, whole-souled and stubborn, and he would have been
content to continue feeding the machine for years; but he was bleeding to
death, and not years but weeks would determine the fight.  Each week his
board bill brought him nearer destruction, while the postage on forty
manuscripts bled him almost as severely.  He no longer bought books, and
he economized in petty ways and sought to delay the inevitable end;
though he did not know how to economize, and brought the end nearer by a
week when he gave his sister Marian five dollars for a dress.

He struggled in the dark, without advice, without encouragement, and in
the teeth of discouragement.  Even Gertrude was beginning to look
askance.  At first she had tolerated with sisterly fondness what she
conceived to be his foolishness; but now, out of sisterly solicitude, she
grew anxious.  To her it seemed that his foolishness was becoming a
madness.  Martin knew this and suffered more keenly from it than from the
open and nagging contempt of Bernard Higginbotham.  Martin had faith in
himself, but he was alone in this faith.  Not even Ruth had faith.  She
had wanted him to devote himself to study, and, though she had not openly
disapproved of his writing, she had never approved.

He had never offered to show her his work.  A fastidious delicacy had
prevented him.  Besides, she had been studying heavily at the university,
and he felt averse to robbing her of her time.  But when she had taken
her degree, she asked him herself to let her see something of what he had
been doing.  Martin was elated and diffident.  Here was a judge.  She was
a bachelor of arts.  She had studied literature under skilled
instructors.  Perhaps the editors were capable judges, too.  But she
would be different from them.  She would not hand him a stereotyped
rejection slip, nor would she inform him that lack of preference for his
work did not necessarily imply lack of merit in his work.  She would
talk, a warm human being, in her quick, bright way, and, most important
of all, she would catch glimpses of the real Martin Eden.  In his work
she would discern what his heart and soul were like, and she would come
to understand something, a little something, of the stuff of his dreams
and the strength of his power.

Martin gathered together a number of carbon copies of his short stories,
hesitated a moment, then added his "Sea Lyrics."  They mounted their
wheels on a late June afternoon and rode for the hills.  It was the
second time he had been out with her alone, and as they rode along
through the balmy warmth, just chilled by she sea-breeze to refreshing
coolness, he was profoundly impressed by the fact that it was a very
beautiful and well-ordered world and that it was good to be alive and to
love.  They left their wheels by the roadside and climbed to the brown
top of an open knoll where the sunburnt grass breathed a harvest breath
of dry sweetness and content.

"Its work is done," Martin said, as they seated themselves, she upon his
coat, and he sprawling close to the warm earth.  He sniffed the sweetness
of the tawny grass, which entered his brain and set his thoughts whirling
on from the particular to the universal.  "It has achieved its reason for
existence," he went on, patting the dry grass affectionately.  "It
quickened with ambition under the dreary downpour of last winter, fought
the violent early spring, flowered, and lured the insects and the bees,
scattered its seeds, squared itself with its duty and the world, and--"

"Why do you always look at things with such dreadfully practical eyes?"
she interrupted.

"Because I've been studying evolution, I guess.  It's only recently that
I got my eyesight, if the truth were told."

"But it seems to me you lose sight of beauty by being so practical, that
you destroy beauty like the boys who catch butterflies and rub the down
off their beautiful wings."

He shook his head.

"Beauty has significance, but I never knew its significance before.  I
just accepted beauty as something meaningless, as something that was just
beautiful without rhyme or reason.  I did not know anything about beauty.
But now I know, or, rather, am just beginning to know.  This grass is
more beautiful to me now that I know why it is grass, and all the hidden
chemistry of sun and rain and earth that makes it become grass.  Why,
there is romance in the life-history of any grass, yes, and adventure,
too.  The very thought of it stirs me.  When I think of the play of force
and matter, and all the tremendous struggle of it, I feel as if I could
write an epic on the grass.

"How well you talk," she said absently, and he noted that she was looking
at him in a searching way.

He was all confusion and embarrassment on the instant, the blood flushing
red on his neck and brow.

"I hope I am learning to talk," he stammered.  "There seems to be so much
in me I want to say.  But it is all so big.  I can't find ways to say
what is really in me.  Sometimes it seems to me that all the world, all
life, everything, had taken up residence inside of me and was clamoring
for me to be the spokesman.  I feel--oh, I can't describe it--I feel the
bigness of it, but when I speak, I babble like a little child.  It is a
great task to transmute feeling and sensation into speech, written or
spoken, that will, in turn, in him who reads or listens, transmute itself
back into the selfsame feeling and sensation.  It is a lordly task.  See,
I bury my face in the grass, and the breath I draw in through my nostrils
sets me quivering with a thousand thoughts and fancies.  It is a breath
of the universe I have breathed.  I know song and laughter, and success
and pain, and struggle and death; and I see visions that arise in my
brain somehow out of the scent of the grass, and I would like to tell
them to you, to the world.  But how can I?  My tongue is tied.  I have
tried, by the spoken word, just now, to describe to you the effect on me
of the scent of the grass.  But I have not succeeded.  I have no more
than hinted in awkward speech.  My words seem gibberish to me.  And yet I
am stifled with desire to tell.  Oh!--" he threw up his hands with a
despairing gesture--"it is impossible!  It is not understandable!  It is
incommunicable!"

"But you do talk well," she insisted.  "Just think how you have improved
in the short time I have known you.  Mr. Butler is a noted public
speaker.  He is always asked by the State Committee to go out on stump
during campaign.  Yet you talked just as well as he the other night at
dinner.  Only he was more controlled.  You get too excited; but you will
get over that with practice.  Why, you would make a good public speaker.
You can go far--if you want to.  You are masterly.  You can lead men, I
am sure, and there is no reason why you should not succeed at anything
you set your hand to, just as you have succeeded with grammar.  You would
make a good lawyer.  You should shine in politics.  There is nothing to
prevent you from making as great a success as Mr. Butler has made.  And
minus the dyspepsia," she added with a smile.

They talked on; she, in her gently persistent way, returning always to
the need of thorough grounding in education and to the advantages of
Latin as part of the foundation for any career.  She drew her ideal of
the successful man, and it was largely in her father's image, with a few
unmistakable lines and touches of color from the image of Mr. Butler.  He
listened eagerly, with receptive ears, lying on his back and looking up
and joying in each movement of her lips as she talked.  But his brain was
not receptive.  There was nothing alluring in the pictures she drew, and
he was aware of a dull pain of disappointment and of a sharper ache of
love for her.  In all she said there was no mention of his writing, and
the manuscripts he had brought to read lay neglected on the ground.

At last, in a pause, he glanced at the sun, measured its height above the
horizon, and suggested his manuscripts by picking them up.

"I had forgotten," she said quickly.  "And I am so anxious to hear."

He read to her a story, one that he flattered himself was among his very
best.  He called it "The Wine of Life," and the wine of it, that had
stolen into his brain when he wrote it, stole into his brain now as he
read it.  There was a certain magic in the original conception, and he
had adorned it with more magic of phrase and touch.  All the old fire and
passion with which he had written it were reborn in him, and he was
swayed and swept away so that he was blind and deaf to the faults of it.
But it was not so with Ruth.  Her trained ear detected the weaknesses and
exaggerations, the overemphasis of the tyro, and she was instantly aware
each time the sentence-rhythm tripped and faltered.  She scarcely noted
the rhythm otherwise, except when it became too pompous, at which moments
she was disagreeably impressed with its amateurishness.  That was her
final judgment on the story as a whole--amateurish, though she did not
tell him so.  Instead, when he had done, she pointed out the minor flaws
and said that she liked the story.

But he was disappointed.  Her criticism was just.  He acknowledged that,
but he had a feeling that he was not sharing his work with her for the
purpose of schoolroom correction.  The details did not matter.  They
could take care of themselves.  He could mend them, he could learn to
mend them.  Out of life he had captured something big and attempted to
imprison it in the story.  It was the big thing out of life he had read
to her, not sentence-structure and semicolons.  He wanted her to feel
with him this big thing that was his, that he had seen with his own eyes,
grappled with his own brain, and placed there on the page with his own
hands in printed words.  Well, he had failed, was his secret decision.
Perhaps the editors were right.  He had felt the big thing, but he had
failed to transmute it.  He concealed his disappointment, and joined so
easily with her in her criticism that she did not realize that deep down
in him was running a strong undercurrent of disagreement.

"This next thing I've called 'The Pot'," he said, unfolding the
manuscript.  "It has been refused by four or five magazines now, but
still I think it is good.  In fact, I don't know what to think of it,
except that I've caught something there.  Maybe it won't affect you as it
does me.  It's a short thing--only two thousand words."

"How dreadful!" she cried, when he had finished.  "It is horrible,
unutterably horrible!"

He noted her pale face, her eyes wide and tense, and her clenched hands,
with secret satisfaction.  He had succeeded.  He had communicated the
stuff of fancy and feeling from out of his brain.  It had struck home.  No
matter whether she liked it or not, it had gripped her and mastered her,
made her sit there and listen and forget details.

"It is life," he said, "and life is not always beautiful.  And yet,
perhaps because I am strangely made, I find something beautiful there.  It
seems to me that the beauty is tenfold enhanced because it is there--"

"But why couldn't the poor woman--" she broke in disconnectedly.  Then
she left the revolt of her thought unexpressed to cry out: "Oh!  It is
degrading!  It is not nice!  It is nasty!"

For the moment it seemed to him that his heart stood still.  _Nasty_!  He
had never dreamed it.  He had not meant it.  The whole sketch stood
before him in letters of fire, and in such blaze of illumination he
sought vainly for nastiness.  Then his heart began to beat again.  He was
not guilty.

"Why didn't you select a nice subject?" she was saying.  "We know there
are nasty things in the world, but that is no reason--"

She talked on in her indignant strain, but he was not following her.  He
was smiling to himself as he looked up into her virginal face, so
innocent, so penetratingly innocent, that its purity seemed always to
enter into him, driving out of him all dross and bathing him in some
ethereal effulgence that was as cool and soft and velvety as starshine.
_We know there are nasty things in the world_!  He cuddled to him the
notion of her knowing, and chuckled over it as a love joke.  The next
moment, in a flashing vision of multitudinous detail, he sighted the
whole sea of life's nastiness that he had known and voyaged over and
through, and he forgave her for not understanding the story.  It was
through no fault of hers that she could not understand.  He thanked God
that she had been born and sheltered to such innocence.  But he knew
life, its foulness as well as its fairness, its greatness in spite of the
slime that infested it, and by God he was going to have his say on it to
the world.  Saints in heaven--how could they be anything but fair and
pure?  No praise to them.  But saints in slime--ah, that was the
everlasting wonder!  That was what made life worth while.  To see moral
grandeur rising out of cesspools of iniquity; to rise himself and first
glimpse beauty, faint and far, through mud-dripping eyes; to see out of
weakness, and frailty, and viciousness, and all abysmal brutishness,
arising strength, and truth, and high spiritual endowment--

He caught a stray sequence of sentences she was uttering.

"The tone of it all is low.  And there is so much that is high.  Take 'In
Memoriam.'"

He was impelled to suggest "Locksley Hall," and would have done so, had
not his vision gripped him again and left him staring at her, the female
of his kind, who, out of the primordial ferment, creeping and crawling up
the vast ladder of life for a thousand thousand centuries, had emerged on
the topmost rung, having become one Ruth, pure, and fair, and divine, and
with power to make him know love, and to aspire toward purity, and to
desire to taste divinity--him, Martin Eden, who, too, had come up in some
amazing fashion from out of the ruck and the mire and the countless
mistakes and abortions of unending creation.  There was the romance, and
the wonder, and the glory.  There was the stuff to write, if he could
only find speech.  Saints in heaven!--They were only saints and could not
help themselves.  But he was a man.

"You have strength," he could hear her saying, "but it is untutored
strength."

"Like a bull in a china shop," he suggested, and won a smile.

"And you must develop discrimination.  You must consult taste, and
fineness, and tone."

"I dare too much," he muttered.

She smiled approbation, and settled herself to listen to another story.

"I don't know what you'll make of this," he said apologetically.  "It's a
funny thing.  I'm afraid I got beyond my depth in it, but my intentions
were good.  Don't bother about the little features of it.  Just see if
you catch the feel of the big thing in it.  It is big, and it is true,
though the chance is large that I have failed to make it intelligible."

He read, and as he read he watched her.  At last he had reached her, he
thought.  She sat without movement, her eyes steadfast upon him, scarcely
breathing, caught up and out of herself, he thought, by the witchery of
the thing he had created.  He had entitled the story "Adventure," and it
was the apotheosis of adventure--not of the adventure of the storybooks,
but of real adventure, the savage taskmaster, awful of punishment and
awful of reward, faithless and whimsical, demanding terrible patience and
heartbreaking days and nights of toil, offering the blazing sunlight
glory or dark death at the end of thirst and famine or of the long drag
and monstrous delirium of rotting fever, through blood and sweat and
stinging insects leading up by long chains of petty and ignoble contacts
to royal culminations and lordly achievements.

It was this, all of it, and more, that he had put into his story, and it
was this, he believed, that warmed her as she sat and listened.  Her eyes
were wide, color was in her pale cheeks, and before he finished it seemed
to him that she was almost panting.  Truly, she was warmed; but she was
warmed, not by the story, but by him.  She did not think much of the
story; it was Martin's intensity of power, the old excess of strength
that seemed to pour from his body and on and over her.  The paradox of it
was that it was the story itself that was freighted with his power, that
was the channel, for the time being, through which his strength poured
out to her.  She was aware only of the strength, and not of the medium,
and when she seemed most carried away by what he had written, in reality
she had been carried away by something quite foreign to it--by a thought,
terrible and perilous, that had formed itself unsummoned in her brain.
She had caught herself wondering what marriage was like, and the becoming
conscious of the waywardness and ardor of the thought had terrified her.
It was unmaidenly.  It was not like her.  She had never been tormented by
womanhood, and she had lived in a dreamland of Tennysonian poesy, dense
even to the full significance of that delicate master's delicate
allusions to the grossnesses that intrude upon the relations of queens
and knights.  She had been asleep, always, and now life was thundering
imperatively at all her doors.  Mentally she was in a panic to shoot the
bolts and drop the bars into place, while wanton instincts urged her to
throw wide her portals and bid the deliciously strange visitor to enter
in.

Martin waited with satisfaction for her verdict.  He had no doubt of what
it would be, and he was astounded when he heard her say:

"It is beautiful."

"It is beautiful," she repeated, with emphasis, after a pause.

Of course it was beautiful; but there was something more than mere beauty
in it, something more stingingly splendid which had made beauty its
handmaiden.  He sprawled silently on the ground, watching the grisly form
of a great doubt rising before him.  He had failed.  He was inarticulate.
He had seen one of the greatest things in the world, and he had not
expressed it.

"What did you think of the--"  He hesitated, abashed at his first attempt
to use a strange word.  "Of the _motif_?" he asked.

"It was confused," she answered.  "That is my only criticism in the large
way.  I followed the story, but there seemed so much else.  It is too
wordy.  You clog the action by introducing so much extraneous material."

"That was the major _motif_," he hurriedly explained, "the big
underrunning _motif_, the cosmic and universal thing.  I tried to make it
keep time with the story itself, which was only superficial after all.  I
was on the right scent, but I guess I did it badly.  I did not succeed in
suggesting what I was driving at.  But I'll learn in time."

She did not follow him.  She was a bachelor of arts, but he had gone
beyond her limitations.  This she did not comprehend, attributing her
incomprehension to his incoherence.

"You were too voluble," she said.  "But it was beautiful, in places."

He heard her voice as from far off, for he was debating whether he would
read her the "Sea Lyrics."  He lay in dull despair, while she watched him
searchingly, pondering again upon unsummoned and wayward thoughts of
marriage.

"You want to be famous?" she asked abruptly.

"Yes, a little bit," he confessed.  "That is part of the adventure.  It
is not the being famous, but the process of becoming so, that counts.  And
after all, to be famous would be, for me, only a means to something else.
I want to be famous very much, for that matter, and for that reason."

"For your sake," he wanted to add, and might have added had she proved
enthusiastic over what he had read to her.

But she was too busy in her mind, carving out a career for him that would
at least be possible, to ask what the ultimate something was which he had
hinted at.  There was no career for him in literature.  Of that she was
convinced.  He had proved it to-day, with his amateurish and sophomoric
productions.  He could talk well, but he was incapable of expressing
himself in a literary way.  She compared Tennyson, and Browning, and her
favorite prose masters with him, and to his hopeless discredit.  Yet she
did not tell him her whole mind.  Her strange interest in him led her to
temporize.  His desire to write was, after all, a little weakness which
he would grow out of in time.  Then he would devote himself to the more
serious affairs of life.  And he would succeed, too.  She knew that.  He
was so strong that he could not fail--if only he would drop writing.

"I wish you would show me all you write, Mr. Eden," she said.

He flushed with pleasure.  She was interested, that much was sure.  And
at least she had not given him a rejection slip.  She had called certain
portions of his work beautiful, and that was the first encouragement he
had ever received from any one.

"I will," he said passionately.  "And I promise you, Miss Morse, that I
will make good.  I have come far, I know that; and I have far to go, and
I will cover it if I have to do it on my hands and knees."  He held up a
bunch of manuscript.  "Here are the 'Sea Lyrics.'  When you get home,
I'll turn them over to you to read at your leisure.  And you must be sure
to tell me just what you think of them.  What I need, you know, above all
things, is criticism.  And do, please, be frank with me."

"I will be perfectly frank," she promised, with an uneasy conviction that
she had not been frank with him and with a doubt if she could be quite
frank with him the next time.


