

CHAPTER XV


"The first battle, fought and finished," Martin said to the looking-glass
ten days later.  "But there will be a second battle, and a third battle,
and battles to the end of time, unless--"

He had not finished the sentence, but looked about the mean little room
and let his eyes dwell sadly upon a heap of returned manuscripts, still
in their long envelopes, which lay in a corner on the floor.  He had no
stamps with which to continue them on their travels, and for a week they
had been piling up.  More of them would come in on the morrow, and on the
next day, and the next, till they were all in.  And he would be unable to
start them out again.  He was a month's rent behind on the typewriter,
which he could not pay, having barely enough for the week's board which
was due and for the employment office fees.

He sat down and regarded the table thoughtfully.  There were ink stains
upon it, and he suddenly discovered that he was fond of it.

"Dear old table," he said, "I've spent some happy hours with you, and
you've been a pretty good friend when all is said and done.  You never
turned me down, never passed me out a reward-of-unmerit rejection slip,
never complained about working overtime."

He dropped his arms upon the table and buried his face in them.  His
throat was aching, and he wanted to cry.  It reminded him of his first
fight, when he was six years old, when he punched away with the tears
running down his cheeks while the other boy, two years his elder, had
beaten and pounded him into exhaustion.  He saw the ring of boys, howling
like barbarians as he went down at last, writhing in the throes of
nausea, the blood streaming from his nose and the tears from his bruised
eyes.

"Poor little shaver," he murmured.  "And you're just as badly licked now.
You're beaten to a pulp.  You're down and out."

But the vision of that first fight still lingered under his eyelids, and
as he watched he saw it dissolve and reshape into the series of fights
which had followed.  Six months later Cheese-Face (that was the boy) had
whipped him again.  But he had blacked Cheese-Face's eye that time.  That
was going some.  He saw them all, fight after fight, himself always
whipped and Cheese-Face exulting over him.  But he had never run away.  He
felt strengthened by the memory of that.  He had always stayed and taken
his medicine.  Cheese-Face had been a little fiend at fighting, and had
never once shown mercy to him.  But he had stayed!  He had stayed with
it!

Next, he saw a narrow alley, between ramshackle frame buildings.  The end
of the alley was blocked by a one-story brick building, out of which
issued the rhythmic thunder of the presses, running off the first edition
of the Enquirer.  He was eleven, and Cheese-Face was thirteen, and they
both carried the Enquirer.  That was why they were there, waiting for
their papers.  And, of course, Cheese-Face had picked on him again, and
there was another fight that was indeterminate, because at quarter to
four the door of the press-room was thrown open and the gang of boys
crowded in to fold their papers.

"I'll lick you to-morrow," he heard Cheese-Face promise; and he heard his
own voice, piping and trembling with unshed tears, agreeing to be there
on the morrow.

And he had come there the next day, hurrying from school to be there
first, and beating Cheese-Face by two minutes.  The other boys said he
was all right, and gave him advice, pointing out his faults as a scrapper
and promising him victory if he carried out their instructions.  The same
boys gave Cheese-Face advice, too.  How they had enjoyed the fight!  He
paused in his recollections long enough to envy them the spectacle he and
Cheese-Face had put up.  Then the fight was on, and it went on, without
rounds, for thirty minutes, until the press-room door was opened.

He watched the youthful apparition of himself, day after day, hurrying
from school to the Enquirer alley.  He could not walk very fast.  He was
stiff and lame from the incessant fighting.  His forearms were black and
blue from wrist to elbow, what of the countless blows he had warded off,
and here and there the tortured flesh was beginning to fester.  His head
and arms and shoulders ached, the small of his back ached,--he ached all
over, and his brain was heavy and dazed.  He did not play at school.  Nor
did he study.  Even to sit still all day at his desk, as he did, was a
torment.  It seemed centuries since he had begun the round of daily
fights, and time stretched away into a nightmare and infinite future of
daily fights.  Why couldn't Cheese-Face be licked? he often thought; that
would put him, Martin, out of his misery.  It never entered his head to
cease fighting, to allow Cheese-Face to whip him.

And so he dragged himself to the Enquirer alley, sick in body and soul,
but learning the long patience, to confront his eternal enemy, Cheese-
Face, who was just as sick as he, and just a bit willing to quit if it
were not for the gang of newsboys that looked on and made pride painful
and necessary.  One afternoon, after twenty minutes of desperate efforts
to annihilate each other according to set rules that did not permit
kicking, striking below the belt, nor hitting when one was down, Cheese-
Face, panting for breath and reeling, offered to call it quits.  And
Martin, head on arms, thrilled at the picture he caught of himself, at
that moment in the afternoon of long ago, when he reeled and panted and
choked with the blood that ran into his mouth and down his throat from
his cut lips; when he tottered toward Cheese-Face, spitting out a
mouthful of blood so that he could speak, crying out that he would never
quit, though Cheese-Face could give in if he wanted to.  And Cheese-Face
did not give in, and the fight went on.

The next day and the next, days without end, witnessed the afternoon
fight.  When he put up his arms, each day, to begin, they pained
exquisitely, and the first few blows, struck and received, racked his
soul; after that things grew numb, and he fought on blindly, seeing as in
a dream, dancing and wavering, the large features and burning, animal-
like eyes of Cheese-Face.  He concentrated upon that face; all else about
him was a whirling void.  There was nothing else in the world but that
face, and he would never know rest, blessed rest, until he had beaten
that face into a pulp with his bleeding knuckles, or until the bleeding
knuckles that somehow belonged to that face had beaten him into a pulp.
And then, one way or the other, he would have rest.  But to quit,--for
him, Martin, to quit,--that was impossible!

Came the day when he dragged himself into the Enquirer alley, and there
was no Cheese-Face.  Nor did Cheese-Face come.  The boys congratulated
him, and told him that he had licked Cheese-Face.  But Martin was not
satisfied.  He had not licked Cheese-Face, nor had Cheese-Face licked
him.  The problem had not been solved.  It was not until afterward that
they learned that Cheese-Face's father had died suddenly that very day.

Martin skipped on through the years to the night in the nigger heaven at
the Auditorium.  He was seventeen and just back from sea.  A row started.
Somebody was bullying somebody, and Martin interfered, to be confronted
by Cheese-Face's blazing eyes.

"I'll fix you after de show," his ancient enemy hissed.

Martin nodded.  The nigger-heaven bouncer was making his way toward the
disturbance.

"I'll meet you outside, after the last act," Martin whispered, the while
his face showed undivided interest in the buck-and-wing dancing on the
stage.

The bouncer glared and went away.

"Got a gang?" he asked Cheese-Face, at the end of the act.

"Sure."

"Then I got to get one," Martin announced.

Between the acts he mustered his following--three fellows he knew from
the nail works, a railroad fireman, and half a dozen of the Boo Gang,
along with as many more from the dread Eighteen-and-Market Gang.

When the theatre let out, the two gangs strung along inconspicuously on
opposite sides of the street.  When they came to a quiet corner, they
united and held a council of war.

"Eighth Street Bridge is the place," said a red-headed fellow belonging
to Cheese-Face's Gang.  "You kin fight in the middle, under the electric
light, an' whichever way the bulls come in we kin sneak the other way."

"That's agreeable to me," Martin said, after consulting with the leaders
of his own gang.

The Eighth Street Bridge, crossing an arm of San Antonio Estuary, was the
length of three city blocks.  In the middle of the bridge, and at each
end, were electric lights.  No policeman could pass those end-lights
unseen.  It was the safe place for the battle that revived itself under
Martin's eyelids.  He saw the two gangs, aggressive and sullen, rigidly
keeping apart from each other and backing their respective champions; and
he saw himself and Cheese-Face stripping.  A short distance away lookouts
were set, their task being to watch the lighted ends of the bridge.  A
member of the Boo Gang held Martin's coat, and shirt, and cap, ready to
race with them into safety in case the police interfered.  Martin watched
himself go into the centre, facing Cheese-Face, and he heard himself say,
as he held up his hand warningly:-

"They ain't no hand-shakin' in this.  Understand?  They ain't nothin' but
scrap.  No throwin' up the sponge.  This is a grudge-fight an' it's to a
finish.  Understand?  Somebody's goin' to get licked."

Cheese-Face wanted to demur,--Martin could see that,--but Cheese-Face's
old perilous pride was touched before the two gangs.

"Aw, come on," he replied.  "Wot's the good of chewin' de rag about it?
I'm wit' cheh to de finish."

Then they fell upon each other, like young bulls, in all the glory of
youth, with naked fists, with hatred, with desire to hurt, to maim, to
destroy.  All the painful, thousand years' gains of man in his upward
climb through creation were lost.  Only the electric light remained, a
milestone on the path of the great human adventure.  Martin and Cheese-
Face were two savages, of the stone age, of the squatting place and the
tree refuge.  They sank lower and lower into the muddy abyss, back into
the dregs of the raw beginnings of life, striving blindly and chemically,
as atoms strive, as the star-dust of the heavens strives, colliding,
recoiling, and colliding again and eternally again.

"God!  We are animals!  Brute-beasts!"  Martin muttered aloud, as he
watched the progress of the fight.  It was to him, with his splendid
power of vision, like gazing into a kinetoscope.  He was both onlooker
and participant.  His long months of culture and refinement shuddered at
the sight; then the present was blotted out of his consciousness and the
ghosts of the past possessed him, and he was Martin Eden, just returned
from sea and fighting Cheese-Face on the Eighth Street Bridge.  He
suffered and toiled and sweated and bled, and exulted when his naked
knuckles smashed home.

They were twin whirlwinds of hatred, revolving about each other
monstrously.  The time passed, and the two hostile gangs became very
quiet.  They had never witnessed such intensity of ferocity, and they
were awed by it.  The two fighters were greater brutes than they.  The
first splendid velvet edge of youth and condition wore off, and they
fought more cautiously and deliberately.  There had been no advantage
gained either way.  "It's anybody's fight," Martin heard some one saying.
Then he followed up a feint, right and left, was fiercely countered, and
felt his cheek laid open to the bone.  No bare knuckle had done that.  He
heard mutters of amazement at the ghastly damage wrought, and was
drenched with his own blood.  But he gave no sign.  He became immensely
wary, for he was wise with knowledge of the low cunning and foul vileness
of his kind.  He watched and waited, until he feigned a wild rush, which
he stopped midway, for he had seen the glint of metal.

"Hold up yer hand!" he screamed.  "Them's brass knuckles, an' you hit me
with 'em!"

Both gangs surged forward, growling and snarling.  In a second there
would be a free-for-all fight, and he would be robbed of his vengeance.
He was beside himself.

"You guys keep out!" he screamed hoarsely.  "Understand?  Say, d'ye
understand?"

They shrank away from him.  They were brutes, but he was the arch-brute,
a thing of terror that towered over them and dominated them.

"This is my scrap, an' they ain't goin' to be no buttin' in.  Gimme them
knuckles."

Cheese-Face, sobered and a bit frightened, surrendered the foul weapon.

"You passed 'em to him, you red-head sneakin' in behind the push there,"
Martin went on, as he tossed the knuckles into the water.  "I seen you,
an' I was wonderin' what you was up to.  If you try anything like that
again, I'll beat cheh to death.  Understand?"

They fought on, through exhaustion and beyond, to exhaustion immeasurable
and inconceivable, until the crowd of brutes, its blood-lust sated,
terrified by what it saw, begged them impartially to cease.  And Cheese-
Face, ready to drop and die, or to stay on his legs and die, a grisly
monster out of whose features all likeness to Cheese-Face had been
beaten, wavered and hesitated; but Martin sprang in and smashed him again
and again.

Next, after a seeming century or so, with Cheese-Face weakening fast, in
a mix-up of blows there was a loud snap, and Martin's right arm dropped
to his side.  It was a broken bone.  Everybody heard it and knew; and
Cheese-Face knew, rushing like a tiger in the other's extremity and
raining blow on blow.  Martin's gang surged forward to interfere.  Dazed
by the rapid succession of blows, Martin warned them back with vile and
earnest curses sobbed out and groaned in ultimate desolation and despair.

He punched on, with his left hand only, and as he punched, doggedly, only
half-conscious, as from a remote distance he heard murmurs of fear in the
gangs, and one who said with shaking voice: "This ain't a scrap, fellows.
It's murder, an' we ought to stop it."

But no one stopped it, and he was glad, punching on wearily and endlessly
with his one arm, battering away at a bloody something before him that
was not a face but a horror, an oscillating, hideous, gibbering, nameless
thing that persisted before his wavering vision and would not go away.
And he punched on and on, slower and slower, as the last shreds of
vitality oozed from him, through centuries and aeons and enormous lapses
of time, until, in a dim way, he became aware that the nameless thing was
sinking, slowly sinking down to the rough board-planking of the bridge.
And the next moment he was standing over it, staggering and swaying on
shaky legs, clutching at the air for support, and saying in a voice he
did not recognize:-

"D'ye want any more?  Say, d'ye want any more?"

He was still saying it, over and over,--demanding, entreating,
threatening, to know if it wanted any more,--when he felt the fellows of
his gang laying hands on him, patting him on the back and trying to put
his coat on him.  And then came a sudden rush of blackness and oblivion.

The tin alarm-clock on the table ticked on, but Martin Eden, his face
buried on his arms, did not hear it.  He heard nothing.  He did not
think.  So absolutely had he relived life that he had fainted just as he
fainted years before on the Eighth Street Bridge.  For a full minute the
blackness and the blankness endured.  Then, like one from the dead, he
sprang upright, eyes flaming, sweat pouring down his face, shouting:-

"I licked you, Cheese-Face!  It took me eleven years, but I licked you!"

His knees were trembling under him, he felt faint, and he staggered back
to the bed, sinking down and sitting on the edge of it.  He was still in
the clutch of the past.  He looked about the room, perplexed, alarmed,
wondering where he was, until he caught sight of the pile of manuscripts
in the corner.  Then the wheels of memory slipped ahead through four
years of time, and he was aware of the present, of the books he had
opened and the universe he had won from their pages, of his dreams and
ambitions, and of his love for a pale wraith of a girl, sensitive and
sheltered and ethereal, who would die of horror did she witness but one
moment of what he had just lived through--one moment of all the muck of
life through which he had waded.

He arose to his feet and confronted himself in the looking-glass.

"And so you arise from the mud, Martin Eden," he said solemnly.  "And you
cleanse your eyes in a great brightness, and thrust your shoulders among
the stars, doing what all life has done, letting the 'ape and tiger die'
and wresting highest heritage from all powers that be."

He looked more closely at himself and laughed.

"A bit of hysteria and melodrama, eh?" he queried.  "Well, never mind.
You licked Cheese-Face, and you'll lick the editors if it takes twice
eleven years to do it in.  You can't stop here.  You've got to go on.
It's to a finish, you know."


