

CHAPTER XVII


Martin learned to do many things.  In the course of the first week, in
one afternoon, he and Joe accounted for the two hundred white shirts.  Joe
ran the tiler, a machine wherein a hot iron was hooked on a steel string
which furnished the pressure.  By this means he ironed the yoke,
wristbands, and neckband, setting the latter at right angles to the
shirt, and put the glossy finish on the bosom.  As fast as he finished
them, he flung the shirts on a rack between him and Martin, who caught
them up and "backed" them.  This task consisted of ironing all the
unstarched portions of the shirts.

It was exhausting work, carried on, hour after hour, at top speed.  Out
on the broad verandas of the hotel, men and women, in cool white, sipped
iced drinks and kept their circulation down.  But in the laundry the air
was sizzling.  The huge stove roared red hot and white hot, while the
irons, moving over the damp cloth, sent up clouds of steam.  The heat of
these irons was different from that used by housewives.  An iron that
stood the ordinary test of a wet finger was too cold for Joe and Martin,
and such test was useless.  They went wholly by holding the irons close
to their cheeks, gauging the heat by some secret mental process that
Martin admired but could not understand.  When the fresh irons proved too
hot, they hooked them on iron rods and dipped them into cold water.  This
again required a precise and subtle judgment.  A fraction of a second too
long in the water and the fine and silken edge of the proper heat was
lost, and Martin found time to marvel at the accuracy he developed--an
automatic accuracy, founded upon criteria that were machine-like and
unerring.

But there was little time in which to marvel.  All Martin's consciousness
was concentrated in the work.  Ceaselessly active, head and hand, an
intelligent machine, all that constituted him a man was devoted to
furnishing that intelligence.  There was no room in his brain for the
universe and its mighty problems.  All the broad and spacious corridors
of his mind were closed and hermetically sealed.  The echoing chamber of
his soul was a narrow room, a conning tower, whence were directed his arm
and shoulder muscles, his ten nimble fingers, and the swift-moving iron
along its steaming path in broad, sweeping strokes, just so many strokes
and no more, just so far with each stroke and not a fraction of an inch
farther, rushing along interminable sleeves, sides, backs, and tails, and
tossing the finished shirts, without rumpling, upon the receiving frame.
And even as his hurrying soul tossed, it was reaching for another shirt.
This went on, hour after hour, while outside all the world swooned under
the overhead California sun.  But there was no swooning in that
superheated room.  The cool guests on the verandas needed clean linen.

The sweat poured from Martin.  He drank enormous quantities of water, but
so great was the heat of the day and of his exertions, that the water
sluiced through the interstices of his flesh and out at all his pores.
Always, at sea, except at rare intervals, the work he performed had given
him ample opportunity to commune with himself.  The master of the ship
had been lord of Martin's time; but here the manager of the hotel was
lord of Martin's thoughts as well.  He had no thoughts save for the nerve-
racking, body-destroying toil.  Outside of that it was impossible to
think.  He did not know that he loved Ruth.  She did not even exist, for
his driven soul had no time to remember her.  It was only when he crawled
to bed at night, or to breakfast in the morning, that she asserted
herself to him in fleeting memories.

"This is hell, ain't it?" Joe remarked once.

Martin nodded, but felt a rasp of irritation.  The statement had been
obvious and unnecessary.  They did not talk while they worked.
Conversation threw them out of their stride, as it did this time,
compelling Martin to miss a stroke of his iron and to make two extra
motions before he caught his stride again.

On Friday morning the washer ran.  Twice a week they had to put through
hotel linen,--the sheets, pillow-slips, spreads, table-cloths, and
napkins.  This finished, they buckled down to "fancy starch."  It was
slow work, fastidious and delicate, and Martin did not learn it so
readily.  Besides, he could not take chances.  Mistakes were disastrous.

"See that," Joe said, holding up a filmy corset-cover that he could have
crumpled from view in one hand.  "Scorch that an' it's twenty dollars out
of your wages."

So Martin did not scorch that, and eased down on his muscular tension,
though nervous tension rose higher than ever, and he listened
sympathetically to the other's blasphemies as he toiled and suffered over
the beautiful things that women wear when they do not have to do their
own laundrying.  "Fancy starch" was Martin's nightmare, and it was Joe's,
too.  It was "fancy starch" that robbed them of their hard-won minutes.
They toiled at it all day.  At seven in the evening they broke off to run
the hotel linen through the mangle.  At ten o'clock, while the hotel
guests slept, the two laundrymen sweated on at "fancy starch" till
midnight, till one, till two.  At half-past two they knocked off.

Saturday morning it was "fancy starch," and odds and ends, and at three
in the afternoon the week's work was done.

"You ain't a-goin' to ride them seventy miles into Oakland on top of
this?" Joe demanded, as they sat on the stairs and took a triumphant
smoke.

"Got to," was the answer.

"What are you goin' for?--a girl?"

"No; to save two and a half on the railroad ticket.  I want to renew some
books at the library."

"Why don't you send 'em down an' up by express?  That'll cost only a
quarter each way."

Martin considered it.

"An' take a rest to-morrow," the other urged.  "You need it.  I know I
do.  I'm plumb tuckered out."

He looked it.  Indomitable, never resting, fighting for seconds and
minutes all week, circumventing delays and crushing down obstacles, a
fount of resistless energy, a high-driven human motor, a demon for work,
now that he had accomplished the week's task he was in a state of
collapse.  He was worn and haggard, and his handsome face drooped in lean
exhaustion.  He pulled his cigarette spiritlessly, and his voice was
peculiarly dead and monotonous.  All the snap and fire had gone out of
him.  His triumph seemed a sorry one.

"An' next week we got to do it all over again," he said sadly.  "An'
what's the good of it all, hey?  Sometimes I wish I was a hobo.  They
don't work, an' they get their livin'.  Gee!  I wish I had a glass of
beer; but I can't get up the gumption to go down to the village an' get
it.  You'll stay over, an' send your books dawn by express, or else
you're a damn fool."

"But what can I do here all day Sunday?" Martin asked.

"Rest.  You don't know how tired you are.  Why, I'm that tired Sunday I
can't even read the papers.  I was sick once--typhoid.  In the hospital
two months an' a half.  Didn't do a tap of work all that time.  It was
beautiful."

"It was beautiful," he repeated dreamily, a minute later.

Martin took a bath, after which he found that the head laundryman had
disappeared.  Most likely he had gone for a glass of beer Martin decided,
but the half-mile walk down to the village to find out seemed a long
journey to him.  He lay on his bed with his shoes off, trying to make up
his mind.  He did not reach out for a book.  He was too tired to feel
sleepy, and he lay, scarcely thinking, in a semi-stupor of weariness,
until it was time for supper.  Joe did not appear for that function, and
when Martin heard the gardener remark that most likely he was ripping the
slats off the bar, Martin understood.  He went to bed immediately
afterward, and in the morning decided that he was greatly rested.  Joe
being still absent, Martin procured a Sunday paper and lay down in a
shady nook under the trees.  The morning passed, he knew not how.  He did
not sleep, nobody disturbed him, and he did not finish the paper.  He
came back to it in the afternoon, after dinner, and fell asleep over it.

So passed Sunday, and Monday morning he was hard at work, sorting
clothes, while Joe, a towel bound tightly around his head, with groans
and blasphemies, was running the washer and mixing soft-soap.

"I simply can't help it," he explained.  "I got to drink when Saturday
night comes around."

Another week passed, a great battle that continued under the electric
lights each night and that culminated on Saturday afternoon at three
o'clock, when Joe tasted his moment of wilted triumph and then drifted
down to the village to forget.  Martin's Sunday was the same as before.
He slept in the shade of the trees, toiled aimlessly through the
newspaper, and spent long hours lying on his back, doing nothing,
thinking nothing.  He was too dazed to think, though he was aware that he
did not like himself.  He was self-repelled, as though he had undergone
some degradation or was intrinsically foul.  All that was god-like in him
was blotted out.  The spur of ambition was blunted; he had no vitality
with which to feel the prod of it.  He was dead.  His soul seemed dead.
He was a beast, a work-beast.  He saw no beauty in the sunshine sifting
down through the green leaves, nor did the azure vault of the sky whisper
as of old and hint of cosmic vastness and secrets trembling to
disclosure.  Life was intolerably dull and stupid, and its taste was bad
in his mouth.  A black screen was drawn across his mirror of inner
vision, and fancy lay in a darkened sick-room where entered no ray of
light.  He envied Joe, down in the village, rampant, tearing the slats
off the bar, his brain gnawing with maggots, exulting in maudlin ways
over maudlin things, fantastically and gloriously drunk and forgetful of
Monday morning and the week of deadening toil to come.

A third week went by, and Martin loathed himself, and loathed life.  He
was oppressed by a sense of failure.  There was reason for the editors
refusing his stuff.  He could see that clearly now, and laugh at himself
and the dreams he had dreamed.  Ruth returned his "Sea Lyrics" by mail.
He read her letter apathetically.  She did her best to say how much she
liked them and that they were beautiful.  But she could not lie, and she
could not disguise the truth from herself.  She knew they were failures,
and he read her disapproval in every perfunctory and unenthusiastic line
of her letter.  And she was right.  He was firmly convinced of it as he
read the poems over.  Beauty and wonder had departed from him, and as he
read the poems he caught himself puzzling as to what he had had in mind
when he wrote them.  His audacities of phrase struck him as grotesque,
his felicities of expression were monstrosities, and everything was
absurd, unreal, and impossible.  He would have burned the "Sea Lyrics" on
the spot, had his will been strong enough to set them aflame.  There was
the engine-room, but the exertion of carrying them to the furnace was not
worth while.  All his exertion was used in washing other persons'
clothes.  He did not have any left for private affairs.

He resolved that when Sunday came he would pull himself together and
answer Ruth's letter.  But Saturday afternoon, after work was finished
and he had taken a bath, the desire to forget overpowered him.  "I guess
I'll go down and see how Joe's getting on," was the way he put it to
himself; and in the same moment he knew that he lied.  But he did not
have the energy to consider the lie.  If he had had the energy, he would
have refused to consider the lie, because he wanted to forget.  He
started for the village slowly and casually, increasing his pace in spite
of himself as he neared the saloon.

"I thought you was on the water-wagon," was Joe's greeting.

Martin did not deign to offer excuses, but called for whiskey, filling
his own glass brimming before he passed the bottle.

"Don't take all night about it," he said roughly.

The other was dawdling with the bottle, and Martin refused to wait for
him, tossing the glass off in a gulp and refilling it.

"Now, I can wait for you," he said grimly; "but hurry up."

Joe hurried, and they drank together.

"The work did it, eh?" Joe queried.

Martin refused to discuss the matter.

"It's fair hell, I know," the other went on, "but I kind of hate to see
you come off the wagon, Mart.  Well, here's how!"

Martin drank on silently, biting out his orders and invitations and awing
the barkeeper, an effeminate country youngster with watery blue eyes and
hair parted in the middle.

"It's something scandalous the way they work us poor devils," Joe was
remarking.  "If I didn't bowl up, I'd break loose an' burn down the
shebang.  My bowlin' up is all that saves 'em, I can tell you that."

But Martin made no answer.  A few more drinks, and in his brain he felt
the maggots of intoxication beginning to crawl.  Ah, it was living, the
first breath of life he had breathed in three weeks.  His dreams came
back to him.  Fancy came out of the darkened room and lured him on, a
thing of flaming brightness.  His mirror of vision was silver-clear, a
flashing, dazzling palimpsest of imagery.  Wonder and beauty walked with
him, hand in hand, and all power was his.  He tried to tell it to Joe,
but Joe had visions of his own, infallible schemes whereby he would
escape the slavery of laundry-work and become himself the owner of a
great steam laundry.

"I tell yeh, Mart, they won't be no kids workin' in my laundry--not on
yer life.  An' they won't be no workin' a livin' soul after six P.M.  You
hear me talk!  They'll be machinery enough an' hands enough to do it all
in decent workin' hours, an' Mart, s'help me, I'll make yeh
superintendent of the shebang--the whole of it, all of it.  Now here's
the scheme.  I get on the water-wagon an' save my money for two
years--save an' then--"

But Martin turned away, leaving him to tell it to the barkeeper, until
that worthy was called away to furnish drinks to two farmers who, coming
in, accepted Martin's invitation.  Martin dispensed royal largess,
inviting everybody up, farm-hands, a stableman, and the gardener's
assistant from the hotel, the barkeeper, and the furtive hobo who slid in
like a shadow and like a shadow hovered at the end of the bar.


