

CHAPTER XVIII


Monday morning, Joe groaned over the first truck load of clothes to the
washer.

"I say," he began.

"Don't talk to me," Martin snarled.

"I'm sorry, Joe," he said at noon, when they knocked off for dinner.

Tears came into the other's eyes.

"That's all right, old man," he said.  "We're in hell, an' we can't help
ourselves.  An', you know, I kind of like you a whole lot.  That's what
made it--hurt.  I cottoned to you from the first."

Martin shook his hand.

"Let's quit," Joe suggested.  "Let's chuck it, an' go hoboin'.  I ain't
never tried it, but it must be dead easy.  An' nothin' to do.  Just think
of it, nothin' to do.  I was sick once, typhoid, in the hospital, an' it
was beautiful.  I wish I'd get sick again."

The week dragged on.  The hotel was full, and extra "fancy starch" poured
in upon them.  They performed prodigies of valor.  They fought late each
night under the electric lights, bolted their meals, and even got in a
half hour's work before breakfast.  Martin no longer took his cold baths.
Every moment was drive, drive, drive, and Joe was the masterful shepherd
of moments, herding them carefully, never losing one, counting them over
like a miser counting gold, working on in a frenzy, toil-mad, a feverish
machine, aided ably by that other machine that thought of itself as once
having been one Martin Eden, a man.

But it was only at rare moments that Martin was able to think.  The house
of thought was closed, its windows boarded up, and he was its shadowy
caretaker.  He was a shadow.  Joe was right.  They were both shadows, and
this was the unending limbo of toil.  Or was it a dream?  Sometimes, in
the steaming, sizzling heat, as he swung the heavy irons back and forth
over the white garments, it came to him that it was a dream.  In a short
while, or maybe after a thousand years or so, he would awake, in his
little room with the ink-stained table, and take up his writing where he
had left off the day before.  Or maybe that was a dream, too, and the
awakening would be the changing of the watches, when he would drop down
out of his bunk in the lurching forecastle and go up on deck, under the
tropic stars, and take the wheel and feel the cool tradewind blowing
through his flesh.

Came Saturday and its hollow victory at three o'clock.

"Guess I'll go down an' get a glass of beer," Joe said, in the queer,
monotonous tones that marked his week-end collapse.

Martin seemed suddenly to wake up.  He opened the kit bag and oiled his
wheel, putting graphite on the chain and adjusting the bearings.  Joe was
halfway down to the saloon when Martin passed by, bending low over the
handle-bars, his legs driving the ninety-six gear with rhythmic strength,
his face set for seventy miles of road and grade and dust.  He slept in
Oakland that night, and on Sunday covered the seventy miles back.  And on
Monday morning, weary, he began the new week's work, but he had kept
sober.

A fifth week passed, and a sixth, during which he lived and toiled as a
machine, with just a spark of something more in him, just a glimmering
bit of soul, that compelled him, at each week-end, to scorch off the
hundred and forty miles.  But this was not rest.  It was
super-machinelike, and it helped to crush out the glimmering bit of soul
that was all that was left him from former life.  At the end of the
seventh week, without intending it, too weak to resist, he drifted down
to the village with Joe and drowned life and found life until Monday
morning.

Again, at the week-ends, he ground out the one hundred and forty miles,
obliterating the numbness of too great exertion by the numbness of still
greater exertion.  At the end of three months he went down a third time
to the village with Joe.  He forgot, and lived again, and, living, he
saw, in clear illumination, the beast he was making of himself--not by
the drink, but by the work.  The drink was an effect, not a cause.  It
followed inevitably upon the work, as the night follows upon the day.  Not
by becoming a toil-beast could he win to the heights, was the message the
whiskey whispered to him, and he nodded approbation.  The whiskey was
wise.  It told secrets on itself.

He called for paper and pencil, and for drinks all around, and while they
drank his very good health, he clung to the bar and scribbled.

"A telegram, Joe," he said.  "Read it."

Joe read it with a drunken, quizzical leer.  But what he read seemed to
sober him.  He looked at the other reproachfully, tears oozing into his
eyes and down his cheeks.

"You ain't goin' back on me, Mart?" he queried hopelessly.

Martin nodded, and called one of the loungers to him to take the message
to the telegraph office.

"Hold on," Joe muttered thickly.  "Lemme think."

He held on to the bar, his legs wobbling under him, Martin's arm around
him and supporting him, while he thought.

"Make that two laundrymen," he said abruptly.  "Here, lemme fix it."

"What are you quitting for?" Martin demanded.

"Same reason as you."

"But I'm going to sea.  You can't do that."

"Nope," was the answer, "but I can hobo all right, all right."

Martin looked at him searchingly for a moment, then cried:-

"By God, I think you're right!  Better a hobo than a beast of toil.  Why,
man, you'll live.  And that's more than you ever did before."

"I was in hospital, once," Joe corrected.  "It was beautiful.  Typhoid--did
I tell you?"

While Martin changed the telegram to "two laundrymen," Joe went on:-

"I never wanted to drink when I was in hospital.  Funny, ain't it?  But
when I've ben workin' like a slave all week, I just got to bowl up.  Ever
noticed that cooks drink like hell?--an' bakers, too?  It's the work.
They've sure got to.  Here, lemme pay half of that telegram."

"I'll shake you for it," Martin offered.

"Come on, everybody drink," Joe called, as they rattled the dice and
rolled them out on the damp bar.

Monday morning Joe was wild with anticipation.  He did not mind his
aching head, nor did he take interest in his work.  Whole herds of
moments stole away and were lost while their careless shepherd gazed out
of the window at the sunshine and the trees.

"Just look at it!" he cried.  "An' it's all mine!  It's free.  I can lie
down under them trees an' sleep for a thousan' years if I want to.  Aw,
come on, Mart, let's chuck it.  What's the good of waitin' another
moment.  That's the land of nothin' to do out there, an' I got a ticket
for it--an' it ain't no return ticket, b'gosh!"

A few minutes later, filling the truck with soiled clothes for the
washer, Joe spied the hotel manager's shirt.  He knew its mark, and with
a sudden glorious consciousness of freedom he threw it on the floor and
stamped on it.

"I wish you was in it, you pig-headed Dutchman!" he shouted.  "In it, an'
right there where I've got you!  Take that! an' that! an' that! damn you!
Hold me back, somebody!  Hold me back!"

Martin laughed and held him to his work.  On Tuesday night the new
laundrymen arrived, and the rest of the week was spent breaking them into
the routine.  Joe sat around and explained his system, but he did no more
work.

"Not a tap," he announced.  "Not a tap.  They can fire me if they want
to, but if they do, I'll quit.  No more work in mine, thank you kindly.
Me for the freight cars an' the shade under the trees.  Go to it, you
slaves!  That's right.  Slave an' sweat!  Slave an' sweat!  An' when
you're dead, you'll rot the same as me, an' what's it matter how you
live?--eh?  Tell me that--what's it matter in the long run?"

On Saturday they drew their pay and came to the parting of the ways.

"They ain't no use in me askin' you to change your mind an' hit the road
with me?" Joe asked hopelessly:

Martin shook his head.  He was standing by his wheel, ready to start.
They shook hands, and Joe held on to his for a moment, as he said:-

"I'm goin' to see you again, Mart, before you an' me die.  That's
straight dope.  I feel it in my bones.  Good-by, Mart, an' be good.  I
like you like hell, you know."

He stood, a forlorn figure, in the middle of the road, watching until
Martin turned a bend and was gone from sight.

"He's a good Indian, that boy," he muttered.  "A good Indian."

Then he plodded down the road himself, to the water tank, where half a
dozen empties lay on a side-track waiting for the up freight.


