

CHAPTER XX


The desire to write was stirring in Martin once more.  Stories and poems
were springing into spontaneous creation in his brain, and he made notes
of them against the future time when he would give them expression.  But
he did not write.  This was his little vacation; he had resolved to
devote it to rest and love, and in both matters he prospered.  He was
soon spilling over with vitality, and each day he saw Ruth, at the moment
of meeting, she experienced the old shock of his strength and health.

"Be careful," her mother warned her once again.  "I am afraid you are
seeing too much of Martin Eden."

But Ruth laughed from security.  She was sure of herself, and in a few
days he would be off to sea.  Then, by the time he returned, she would be
away on her visit East.  There was a magic, however, in the strength and
health of Martin.  He, too, had been told of her contemplated Eastern
trip, and he felt the need for haste.  Yet he did not know how to make
love to a girl like Ruth.  Then, too, he was handicapped by the
possession of a great fund of experience with girls and women who had
been absolutely different from her.  They had known about love and life
and flirtation, while she knew nothing about such things.  Her prodigious
innocence appalled him, freezing on his lips all ardors of speech, and
convincing him, in spite of himself, of his own unworthiness.  Also he
was handicapped in another way.  He had himself never been in love
before.  He had liked women in that turgid past of his, and been
fascinated by some of them, but he had not known what it was to love
them.  He had whistled in a masterful, careless way, and they had come to
him.  They had been diversions, incidents, part of the game men play, but
a small part at most.  And now, and for the first time, he was a
suppliant, tender and timid and doubting.  He did not know the way of
love, nor its speech, while he was frightened at his loved one's clear
innocence.

In the course of getting acquainted with a varied world, whirling on
through the ever changing phases of it, he had learned a rule of conduct
which was to the effect that when one played a strange game, he should
let the other fellow play first.  This had stood him in good stead a
thousand times and trained him as an observer as well.  He knew how to
watch the thing that was strange, and to wait for a weakness, for a place
of entrance, to divulge itself.  It was like sparring for an opening in
fist-fighting.  And when such an opening came, he knew by long experience
to play for it and to play hard.

So he waited with Ruth and watched, desiring to speak his love but not
daring.  He was afraid of shocking her, and he was not sure of himself.
Had he but known it, he was following the right course with her.  Love
came into the world before articulate speech, and in its own early youth
it had learned ways and means that it had never forgotten.  It was in
this old, primitive way that Martin wooed Ruth.  He did not know he was
doing it at first, though later he divined it.  The touch of his hand on
hers was vastly more potent than any word he could utter, the impact of
his strength on her imagination was more alluring than the printed poems
and spoken passions of a thousand generations of lovers.  Whatever his
tongue could express would have appealed, in part, to her judgment; but
the touch of hand, the fleeting contact, made its way directly to her
instinct.  Her judgment was as young as she, but her instincts were as
old as the race and older.  They had been young when love was young, and
they were wiser than convention and opinion and all the new-born things.
So her judgment did not act.  There was no call upon it, and she did not
realize the strength of the appeal Martin made from moment to moment to
her love-nature.  That he loved her, on the other hand, was as clear as
day, and she consciously delighted in beholding his
love-manifestations--the glowing eyes with their tender lights, the
trembling hands, and the never failing swarthy flush that flooded darkly
under his sunburn.  She even went farther, in a timid way inciting him,
but doing it so delicately that he never suspected, and doing it half-
consciously, so that she scarcely suspected herself.  She thrilled with
these proofs of her power that proclaimed her a woman, and she took an
Eve-like delight in tormenting him and playing upon him.

Tongue-tied by inexperience and by excess of ardor, wooing unwittingly
and awkwardly, Martin continued his approach by contact.  The touch of
his hand was pleasant to her, and something deliciously more than
pleasant.  Martin did not know it, but he did know that it was not
distasteful to her.  Not that they touched hands often, save at meeting
and parting; but that in handling the bicycles, in strapping on the books
of verse they carried into the hills, and in conning the pages of books
side by side, there were opportunities for hand to stray against hand.
And there were opportunities, too, for her hair to brush his cheek, and
for shoulder to touch shoulder, as they leaned together over the beauty
of the books.  She smiled to herself at vagrant impulses which arose from
nowhere and suggested that she rumple his hair; while he desired greatly,
when they tired of reading, to rest his head in her lap and dream with
closed eyes about the future that was to be theirs.  On Sunday picnics at
Shellmound Park and Schuetzen Park, in the past, he had rested his head
on many laps, and, usually, he had slept soundly and selfishly while the
girls shaded his face from the sun and looked down and loved him and
wondered at his lordly carelessness of their love.  To rest his head in a
girl's lap had been the easiest thing in the world until now, and now he
found Ruth's lap inaccessible and impossible.  Yet it was right here, in
his reticence, that the strength of his wooing lay.  It was because of
this reticence that he never alarmed her.  Herself fastidious and timid,
she never awakened to the perilous trend of their intercourse.  Subtly
and unaware she grew toward him and closer to him, while he, sensing the
growing closeness, longed to dare but was afraid.

Once he dared, one afternoon, when he found her in the darkened living
room with a blinding headache.

"Nothing can do it any good," she had answered his inquiries.  "And
besides, I don't take headache powders.  Doctor Hall won't permit me."

"I can cure it, I think, and without drugs," was Martin's answer.  "I am
not sure, of course, but I'd like to try.  It's simply massage.  I
learned the trick first from the Japanese.  They are a race of masseurs,
you know.  Then I learned it all over again with variations from the
Hawaiians.  They call it _lomi-lomi_.  It can accomplish most of the
things drugs accomplish and a few things that drugs can't."

Scarcely had his hands touched her head when she sighed deeply.

"That is so good," she said.

She spoke once again, half an hour later, when she asked, "Aren't you
tired?"

The question was perfunctory, and she knew what the answer would be.  Then
she lost herself in drowsy contemplation of the soothing balm of his
strength: Life poured from the ends of his fingers, driving the pain
before it, or so it seemed to her, until with the easement of pain, she
fell asleep and he stole away.

She called him up by telephone that evening to thank him.

"I slept until dinner," she said.  "You cured me completely, Mr. Eden,
and I don't know how to thank you."

He was warm, and bungling of speech, and very happy, as he replied to
her, and there was dancing in his mind, throughout the telephone
conversation, the memory of Browning and of sickly Elizabeth Barrett.
What had been done could be done again, and he, Martin Eden, could do it
and would do it for Ruth Morse.  He went back to his room and to the
volume of Spencer's "Sociology" lying open on the bed.  But he could not
read.  Love tormented him and overrode his will, so that, despite all
determination, he found himself at the little ink-stained table.  The
sonnet he composed that night was the first of a love-cycle of fifty
sonnets which was completed within two months.  He had the "Love-sonnets
from the Portuguese" in mind as he wrote, and he wrote under the best
conditions for great work, at a climacteric of living, in the throes of
his own sweet love-madness.

The many hours he was not with Ruth he devoted to the "Love-cycle," to
reading at home, or to the public reading-rooms, where he got more
closely in touch with the magazines of the day and the nature of their
policy and content.  The hours he spent with Ruth were maddening alike in
promise and in inconclusiveness.  It was a week after he cured her
headache that a moonlight sail on Lake Merritt was proposed by Norman and
seconded by Arthur and Olney.  Martin was the only one capable of
handling a boat, and he was pressed into service.  Ruth sat near him in
the stern, while the three young fellows lounged amidships, deep in a
wordy wrangle over "frat" affairs.

The moon had not yet risen, and Ruth, gazing into the starry vault of the
sky and exchanging no speech with Martin, experienced a sudden feeling of
loneliness.  She glanced at him.  A puff of wind was heeling the boat
over till the deck was awash, and he, one hand on tiller and the other on
main-sheet, was luffing slightly, at the same time peering ahead to make
out the near-lying north shore.  He was unaware of her gaze, and she
watched him intently, speculating fancifully about the strange warp of
soul that led him, a young man with signal powers, to fritter away his
time on the writing of stories and poems foredoomed to mediocrity and
failure.

Her eyes wandered along the strong throat, dimly seen in the starlight,
and over the firm-poised head, and the old desire to lay her hands upon
his neck came back to her.  The strength she abhorred attracted her.  Her
feeling of loneliness became more pronounced, and she felt tired.  Her
position on the heeling boat irked her, and she remembered the headache
he had cured and the soothing rest that resided in him.  He was sitting
beside her, quite beside her, and the boat seemed to tilt her toward him.
Then arose in her the impulse to lean against him, to rest herself
against his strength--a vague, half-formed impulse, which, even as she
considered it, mastered her and made her lean toward him.  Or was it the
heeling of the boat?  She did not know.  She never knew.  She knew only
that she was leaning against him and that the easement and soothing rest
were very good.  Perhaps it had been the boat's fault, but she made no
effort to retrieve it.  She leaned lightly against his shoulder, but she
leaned, and she continued to lean when he shifted his position to make it
more comfortable for her.

It was a madness, but she refused to consider the madness.  She was no
longer herself but a woman, with a woman's clinging need; and though she
leaned ever so lightly, the need seemed satisfied.  She was no longer
tired.  Martin did not speak.  Had he, the spell would have been broken.
But his reticence of love prolonged it.  He was dazed and dizzy.  He
could not understand what was happening.  It was too wonderful to be
anything but a delirium.  He conquered a mad desire to let go sheet and
tiller and to clasp her in his arms.  His intuition told him it was the
wrong thing to do, and he was glad that sheet and tiller kept his hands
occupied and fended off temptation.  But he luffed the boat less
delicately, spilling the wind shamelessly from the sail so as to prolong
the tack to the north shore.  The shore would compel him to go about, and
the contact would be broken.  He sailed with skill, stopping way on the
boat without exciting the notice of the wranglers, and mentally forgiving
his hardest voyages in that they had made this marvellous night possible,
giving him mastery over sea and boat and wind so that he could sail with
her beside him, her dear weight against him on his shoulder.

When the first light of the rising moon touched the sail, illuminating
the boat with pearly radiance, Ruth moved away from him.  And, even as
she moved, she felt him move away.  The impulse to avoid detection was
mutual.  The episode was tacitly and secretly intimate.  She sat apart
from him with burning cheeks, while the full force of it came home to
her.  She had been guilty of something she would not have her brothers
see, nor Olney see.  Why had she done it?  She had never done anything
like it in her life, and yet she had been moonlight-sailing with young
men before.  She had never desired to do anything like it.  She was
overcome with shame and with the mystery of her own burgeoning womanhood.
She stole a glance at Martin, who was busy putting the boat about on the
other tack, and she could have hated him for having made her do an
immodest and shameful thing.  And he, of all men!  Perhaps her mother was
right, and she was seeing too much of him.  It would never happen again,
she resolved, and she would see less of him in the future.  She
entertained a wild idea of explaining to him the first time they were
alone together, of lying to him, of mentioning casually the attack of
faintness that had overpowered her just before the moon came up.  Then
she remembered how they had drawn mutually away before the revealing
moon, and she knew he would know it for a lie.

In the days that swiftly followed she was no longer herself but a
strange, puzzling creature, wilful over judgment and scornful of self-
analysis, refusing to peer into the future or to think about herself and
whither she was drifting.  She was in a fever of tingling mystery,
alternately frightened and charmed, and in constant bewilderment.  She
had one idea firmly fixed, however, which insured her security.  She
would not let Martin speak his love.  As long as she did this, all would
be well.  In a few days he would be off to sea.  And even if he did
speak, all would be well.  It could not be otherwise, for she did not
love him.  Of course, it would be a painful half hour for him, and an
embarrassing half hour for her, because it would be her first proposal.
She thrilled deliciously at the thought.  She was really a woman, with a
man ripe to ask for her in marriage.  It was a lure to all that was
fundamental in her sex.  The fabric of her life, of all that constituted
her, quivered and grew tremulous.  The thought fluttered in her mind like
a flame-attracted moth.  She went so far as to imagine Martin proposing,
herself putting the words into his mouth; and she rehearsed her refusal,
tempering it with kindness and exhorting him to true and noble manhood.
And especially he must stop smoking cigarettes.  She would make a point
of that.  But no, she must not let him speak at all.  She could stop him,
and she had told her mother that she would.  All flushed and burning, she
regretfully dismissed the conjured situation.  Her first proposal would
have to be deferred to a more propitious time and a more eligible suitor.


