

CHAPTER XXI


Came a beautiful fall day, warm and languid, palpitant with the hush of
the changing season, a California Indian summer day, with hazy sun and
wandering wisps of breeze that did not stir the slumber of the air.  Filmy
purple mists, that were not vapors but fabrics woven of color, hid in the
recesses of the hills.  San Francisco lay like a blur of smoke upon her
heights.  The intervening bay was a dull sheen of molten metal, whereon
sailing craft lay motionless or drifted with the lazy tide.  Far
Tamalpais, barely seen in the silver haze, bulked hugely by the Golden
Gate, the latter a pale gold pathway under the westering sun.  Beyond,
the Pacific, dim and vast, was raising on its sky-line tumbled
cloud-masses that swept landward, giving warning of the first blustering
breath of winter.

The erasure of summer was at hand.  Yet summer lingered, fading and
fainting among her hills, deepening the purple of her valleys, spinning a
shroud of haze from waning powers and sated raptures, dying with the calm
content of having lived and lived well.  And among the hills, on their
favorite knoll, Martin and Ruth sat side by side, their heads bent over
the same pages, he reading aloud from the love-sonnets of the woman who
had loved Browning as it is given to few men to be loved.

But the reading languished.  The spell of passing beauty all about them
was too strong.  The golden year was dying as it had lived, a beautiful
and unrepentant voluptuary, and reminiscent rapture and content freighted
heavily the air.  It entered into them, dreamy and languorous, weakening
the fibres of resolution, suffusing the face of morality, or of judgment,
with haze and purple mist.  Martin felt tender and melting, and from time
to time warm glows passed over him.  His head was very near to hers, and
when wandering phantoms of breeze stirred her hair so that it touched his
face, the printed pages swam before his eyes.

"I don't believe you know a word of what you are reading," she said once
when he had lost his place.

He looked at her with burning eyes, and was on the verge of becoming
awkward, when a retort came to his lips.

"I don't believe you know either.  What was the last sonnet about?"

"I don't know," she laughed frankly.  "I've already forgotten.  Don't let
us read any more.  The day is too beautiful."

"It will be our last in the hills for some time," he announced gravely.
"There's a storm gathering out there on the sea-rim."

The book slipped from his hands to the ground, and they sat idly and
silently, gazing out over the dreamy bay with eyes that dreamed and did
not see.  Ruth glanced sidewise at his neck.  She did not lean toward
him.  She was drawn by some force outside of herself and stronger than
gravitation, strong as destiny.  It was only an inch to lean, and it was
accomplished without volition on her part.  Her shoulder touched his as
lightly as a butterfly touches a flower, and just as lightly was the
counter-pressure.  She felt his shoulder press hers, and a tremor run
through him.  Then was the time for her to draw back.  But she had become
an automaton.  Her actions had passed beyond the control of her will--she
never thought of control or will in the delicious madness that was upon
her.  His arm began to steal behind her and around her.  She waited its
slow progress in a torment of delight.  She waited, she knew not for
what, panting, with dry, burning lips, a leaping pulse, and a fever of
expectancy in all her blood.  The girdling arm lifted higher and drew her
toward him, drew her slowly and caressingly.  She could wait no longer.
With a tired sigh, and with an impulsive movement all her own,
unpremeditated, spasmodic, she rested her head upon his breast.  His head
bent over swiftly, and, as his lips approached, hers flew to meet them.

This must be love, she thought, in the one rational moment that was
vouchsafed her.  If it was not love, it was too shameful.  It could be
nothing else than love.  She loved the man whose arms were around her and
whose lips were pressed to hers.  She pressed more, tightly to him, with
a snuggling movement of her body.  And a moment later, tearing herself
half out of his embrace, suddenly and exultantly she reached up and
placed both hands upon Martin Eden's sunburnt neck.  So exquisite was the
pang of love and desire fulfilled that she uttered a low moan, relaxed
her hands, and lay half-swooning in his arms.

Not a word had been spoken, and not a word was spoken for a long time.
Twice he bent and kissed her, and each time her lips met his shyly and
her body made its happy, nestling movement.  She clung to him, unable to
release herself, and he sat, half supporting her in his arms, as he gazed
with unseeing eyes at the blur of the great city across the bay.  For
once there were no visions in his brain.  Only colors and lights and
glows pulsed there, warm as the day and warm as his love.  He bent over
her.  She was speaking.

"When did you love me?" she whispered.

"From the first, the very first, the first moment I laid eye on you.  I
was mad for love of you then, and in all the time that has passed since
then I have only grown the madder.  I am maddest, now, dear.  I am almost
a lunatic, my head is so turned with joy."

"I am glad I am a woman, Martin--dear," she said, after a long sigh.

He crushed her in his arms again and again, and then asked:-

"And you?  When did you first know?"

"Oh, I knew it all the time, almost, from the first."

"And I have been as blind as a bat!" he cried, a ring of vexation in his
voice.  "I never dreamed it until just how, when I--when I kissed you."

"I didn't mean that."  She drew herself partly away and looked at him.  "I
meant I knew you loved almost from the first."

"And you?" he demanded.

"It came to me suddenly."  She was speaking very slowly, her eyes warm
and fluttery and melting, a soft flush on her cheeks that did not go
away.  "I never knew until just now when--you put your arms around me.
And I never expected to marry you, Martin, not until just now.  How did
you make me love you?"

"I don't know," he laughed, "unless just by loving you, for I loved you
hard enough to melt the heart of a stone, much less the heart of the
living, breathing woman you are."

"This is so different from what I thought love would be," she announced
irrelevantly.

"What did you think it would be like?"

"I didn't think it would be like this."  She was looking into his eyes at
the moment, but her own dropped as she continued, "You see, I didn't know
what this was like."

He offered to draw her toward him again, but it was no more than a
tentative muscular movement of the girdling arm, for he feared that he
might be greedy.  Then he felt her body yielding, and once again she was
close in his arms and lips were pressed on lips.

"What will my people say?" she queried, with sudden apprehension, in one
of the pauses.

"I don't know.  We can find out very easily any time we are so minded."

"But if mamma objects?  I am sure I am afraid to tell her."

"Let me tell her," he volunteered valiantly.  "I think your mother does
not like me, but I can win her around.  A fellow who can win you can win
anything.  And if we don't--"

"Yes?"

"Why, we'll have each other.  But there's no danger not winning your
mother to our marriage.  She loves you too well."

"I should not like to break her heart," Ruth said pensively.

He felt like assuring her that mothers' hearts were not so easily broken,
but instead he said, "And love is the greatest thing in the world."

"Do you know, Martin, you sometimes frighten me.  I am frightened now,
when I think of you and of what you have been.  You must be very, very
good to me.  Remember, after all, that I am only a child.  I never loved
before."

"Nor I.  We are both children together.  And we are fortunate above most,
for we have found our first love in each other."

"But that is impossible!" she cried, withdrawing herself from his arms
with a swift, passionate movement.  "Impossible for you.  You have been a
sailor, and sailors, I have heard, are--are--"

Her voice faltered and died away.

"Are addicted to having a wife in every port?" he suggested.  "Is that
what you mean?"

"Yes," she answered in a low voice.

"But that is not love."  He spoke authoritatively.  "I have been in many
ports, but I never knew a passing touch of love until I saw you that
first night.  Do you know, when I said good night and went away, I was
almost arrested."

"Arrested?"

"Yes.  The policeman thought I was drunk; and I was, too--with love for
you."

"But you said we were children, and I said it was impossible, for you,
and we have strayed away from the point."

"I said that I never loved anybody but you," he replied.  "You are my
first, my very first."

"And yet you have been a sailor," she objected.

"But that doesn't prevent me from loving you the first."

"And there have been women--other women--oh!"

And to Martin Eden's supreme surprise, she burst into a storm of tears
that took more kisses than one and many caresses to drive away.  And all
the while there was running through his head Kipling's line: "_And the
Colonel's lady and Judy O'Grady are sisters under their skins_."  It was
true, he decided; though the novels he had read had led him to believe
otherwise.  His idea, for which the novels were responsible, had been
that only formal proposals obtained in the upper classes.  It was all
right enough, down whence he had come, for youths and maidens to win each
other by contact; but for the exalted personages up above on the heights
to make love in similar fashion had seemed unthinkable.  Yet the novels
were wrong.  Here was a proof of it.  The same pressures and caresses,
unaccompanied by speech, that were efficacious with the girls of the
working-class, were equally efficacious with the girls above the working-
class.  They were all of the same flesh, after all, sisters under their
skins; and he might have known as much himself had he remembered his
Spencer.  As he held Ruth in his arms and soothed her, he took great
consolation in the thought that the Colonel's lady and Judy O'Grady were
pretty much alike under their skins.  It brought Ruth closer to him, made
her possible.  Her dear flesh was as anybody's flesh, as his flesh.  There
was no bar to their marriage.  Class difference was the only difference,
and class was extrinsic.  It could be shaken off.  A slave, he had read,
had risen to the Roman purple.  That being so, then he could rise to
Ruth.  Under her purity, and saintliness, and culture, and ethereal
beauty of soul, she was, in things fundamentally human, just like Lizzie
Connolly and all Lizzie Connollys.  All that was possible of them was
possible of her.  She could love, and hate, maybe have hysterics; and she
could certainly be jealous, as she was jealous now, uttering her last
sobs in his arms.

"Besides, I am older than you," she remarked suddenly, opening her eyes
and looking up at him, "three years older."

"Hush, you are only a child, and I am forty years older than you, in
experience," was his answer.

In truth, they were children together, so far as love was concerned, and
they were as naive and immature in the expression of their love as a pair
of children, and this despite the fact that she was crammed with a
university education and that his head was full of scientific philosophy
and the hard facts of life.

They sat on through the passing glory of the day, talking as lovers are
prone to talk, marvelling at the wonder of love and at destiny that had
flung them so strangely together, and dogmatically believing that they
loved to a degree never attained by lovers before.  And they returned
insistently, again and again, to a rehearsal of their first impressions
of each other and to hopeless attempts to analyze just precisely what
they felt for each other and how much there was of it.

The cloud-masses on the western horizon received the descending sun, and
the circle of the sky turned to rose, while the zenith glowed with the
same warm color.  The rosy light was all about them, flooding over them,
as she sang, "Good-by, Sweet Day."  She sang softly, leaning in the
cradle of his arm, her hands in his, their hearts in each other's hands.


