

CHAPTER XXIII


That Ruth had little faith in his power as a writer, did not alter her
nor diminish her in Martin's eyes.  In the breathing spell of the
vacation he had taken, he had spent many hours in self-analysis, and
thereby learned much of himself.  He had discovered that he loved beauty
more than fame, and that what desire he had for fame was largely for
Ruth's sake.  It was for this reason that his desire for fame was strong.
He wanted to be great in the world's eyes; "to make good," as he
expressed it, in order that the woman he loved should be proud of him and
deem him worthy.

As for himself, he loved beauty passionately, and the joy of serving her
was to him sufficient wage.  And more than beauty he loved Ruth.  He
considered love the finest thing in the world.  It was love that had
worked the revolution in him, changing him from an uncouth sailor to a
student and an artist; therefore, to him, the finest and greatest of the
three, greater than learning and artistry, was love.  Already he had
discovered that his brain went beyond Ruth's, just as it went beyond the
brains of her brothers, or the brain of her father.  In spite of every
advantage of university training, and in the face of her bachelorship of
arts, his power of intellect overshadowed hers, and his year or so of
self-study and equipment gave him a mastery of the affairs of the world
and art and life that she could never hope to possess.

All this he realized, but it did not affect his love for her, nor her
love for him.  Love was too fine and noble, and he was too loyal a lover
for him to besmirch love with criticism.  What did love have to do with
Ruth's divergent views on art, right conduct, the French Revolution, or
equal suffrage?  They were mental processes, but love was beyond reason;
it was superrational.  He could not belittle love.  He worshipped it.
Love lay on the mountain-tops beyond the valley-land of reason.  It was a
sublimates condition of existence, the topmost peak of living, and it
came rarely.  Thanks to the school of scientific philosophers he favored,
he knew the biological significance of love; but by a refined process of
the same scientific reasoning he reached the conclusion that the human
organism achieved its highest purpose in love, that love must not be
questioned, but must be accepted as the highest guerdon of life.  Thus,
he considered the lover blessed over all creatures, and it was a delight
to him to think of "God's own mad lover," rising above the things of
earth, above wealth and judgment, public opinion and applause, rising
above life itself and "dying on a kiss."

Much of this Martin had already reasoned out, and some of it he reasoned
out later.  In the meantime he worked, taking no recreation except when
he went to see Ruth, and living like a Spartan.  He paid two dollars and
a half a month rent for the small room he got from his Portuguese
landlady, Maria Silva, a virago and a widow, hard working and harsher
tempered, rearing her large brood of children somehow, and drowning her
sorrow and fatigue at irregular intervals in a gallon of the thin, sour
wine that she bought from the corner grocery and saloon for fifteen
cents.  From detesting her and her foul tongue at first, Martin grew to
admire her as he observed the brave fight she made.  There were but four
rooms in the little house--three, when Martin's was subtracted.  One of
these, the parlor, gay with an ingrain carpet and dolorous with a funeral
card and a death-picture of one of her numerous departed babes, was kept
strictly for company.  The blinds were always down, and her barefooted
tribe was never permitted to enter the sacred precinct save on state
occasions.  She cooked, and all ate, in the kitchen, where she likewise
washed, starched, and ironed clothes on all days of the week except
Sunday; for her income came largely from taking in washing from her more
prosperous neighbors.  Remained the bedroom, small as the one occupied by
Martin, into which she and her seven little ones crowded and slept.  It
was an everlasting miracle to Martin how it was accomplished, and from
her side of the thin partition he heard nightly every detail of the going
to bed, the squalls and squabbles, the soft chattering, and the sleepy,
twittering noises as of birds.  Another source of income to Maria were
her cows, two of them, which she milked night and morning and which
gained a surreptitious livelihood from vacant lots and the grass that
grew on either side the public side walks, attended always by one or more
of her ragged boys, whose watchful guardianship consisted chiefly in
keeping their eyes out for the poundmen.

In his own small room Martin lived, slept, studied, wrote, and kept
house.  Before the one window, looking out on the tiny front porch, was
the kitchen table that served as desk, library, and type-writing stand.
The bed, against the rear wall, occupied two-thirds of the total space of
the room.  The table was flanked on one side by a gaudy bureau,
manufactured for profit and not for service, the thin veneer of which was
shed day by day.  This bureau stood in the corner, and in the opposite
corner, on the table's other flank, was the kitchen--the oil-stove on a
dry-goods box, inside of which were dishes and cooking utensils, a shelf
on the wall for provisions, and a bucket of water on the floor.  Martin
had to carry his water from the kitchen sink, there being no tap in his
room.  On days when there was much steam to his cooking, the harvest of
veneer from the bureau was unusually generous.  Over the bed, hoisted by
a tackle to the ceiling, was his bicycle.  At first he had tried to keep
it in the basement; but the tribe of Silva, loosening the bearings and
puncturing the tires, had driven him out.  Next he attempted the tiny
front porch, until a howling southeaster drenched the wheel a night-long.
Then he had retreated with it to his room and slung it aloft.

A small closet contained his clothes and the books he had accumulated and
for which there was no room on the table or under the table.  Hand in
hand with reading, he had developed the habit of making notes, and so
copiously did he make them that there would have been no existence for
him in the confined quarters had he not rigged several clothes-lines
across the room on which the notes were hung.  Even so, he was crowded
until navigating the room was a difficult task.  He could not open the
door without first closing the closet door, and vice versa.  It was
impossible for him anywhere to traverse the room in a straight line.  To
go from the door to the head of the bed was a zigzag course that he was
never quite able to accomplish in the dark without collisions.  Having
settled the difficulty of the conflicting doors, he had to steer sharply
to the right to avoid the kitchen.  Next, he sheered to the left, to
escape the foot of the bed; but this sheer, if too generous, brought him
against the corner of the table.  With a sudden twitch and lurch, he
terminated the sheer and bore off to the right along a sort of canal, one
bank of which was the bed, the other the table.  When the one chair in
the room was at its usual place before the table, the canal was
unnavigable.  When the chair was not in use, it reposed on top of the
bed, though sometimes he sat on the chair when cooking, reading a book
while the water boiled, and even becoming skilful enough to manage a
paragraph or two while steak was frying.  Also, so small was the little
corner that constituted the kitchen, he was able, sitting down, to reach
anything he needed.  In fact, it was expedient to cook sitting down;
standing up, he was too often in his own way.

In conjunction with a perfect stomach that could digest anything, he
possessed knowledge of the various foods that were at the same time
nutritious and cheap.  Pea-soup was a common article in his diet, as well
as potatoes and beans, the latter large and brown and cooked in Mexican
style.  Rice, cooked as American housewives never cook it and can never
learn to cook it, appeared on Martin's table at least once a day.  Dried
fruits were less expensive than fresh, and he had usually a pot of them,
cooked and ready at hand, for they took the place of butter on his bread.
Occasionally he graced his table with a piece of round-steak, or with a
soup-bone.  Coffee, without cream or milk, he had twice a day, in the
evening substituting tea; but both coffee and tea were excellently
cooked.

There was need for him to be economical.  His vacation had consumed
nearly all he had earned in the laundry, and he was so far from his
market that weeks must elapse before he could hope for the first returns
from his hack-work.  Except at such times as he saw Ruth, or dropped in
to see his sister Gertude, he lived a recluse, in each day accomplishing
at least three days' labor of ordinary men.  He slept a scant five hours,
and only one with a constitution of iron could have held himself down, as
Martin did, day after day, to nineteen consecutive hours of toil.  He
never lost a moment.  On the looking-glass were lists of definitions and
pronunciations; when shaving, or dressing, or combing his hair, he conned
these lists over.  Similar lists were on the wall over the oil-stove, and
they were similarly conned while he was engaged in cooking or in washing
the dishes.  New lists continually displaced the old ones.  Every strange
or partly familiar word encountered in his reading was immediately jotted
down, and later, when a sufficient number had been accumulated, were
typed and pinned to the wall or looking-glass.  He even carried them in
his pockets, and reviewed them at odd moments on the street, or while
waiting in butcher shop or grocery to be served.

He went farther in the matter.  Reading the works of men who had arrived,
he noted every result achieved by them, and worked out the tricks by
which they had been achieved--the tricks of narrative, of exposition, of
style, the points of view, the contrasts, the epigrams; and of all these
he made lists for study.  He did not ape.  He sought principles.  He drew
up lists of effective and fetching mannerisms, till out of many such,
culled from many writers, he was able to induce the general principle of
mannerism, and, thus equipped, to cast about for new and original ones of
his own, and to weigh and measure and appraise them properly.  In similar
manner he collected lists of strong phrases, the phrases of living
language, phrases that bit like acid and scorched like flame, or that
glowed and were mellow and luscious in the midst of the arid desert of
common speech.  He sought always for the principle that lay behind and
beneath.  He wanted to know how the thing was done; after that he could
do it for himself.  He was not content with the fair face of beauty.  He
dissected beauty in his crowded little bedroom laboratory, where cooking
smells alternated with the outer bedlam of the Silva tribe; and, having
dissected and learned the anatomy of beauty, he was nearer being able to
create beauty itself.

He was so made that he could work only with understanding.  He could not
work blindly, in the dark, ignorant of what he was producing and trusting
to chance and the star of his genius that the effect produced should be
right and fine.  He had no patience with chance effects.  He wanted to
know why and how.  His was deliberate creative genius, and, before he
began a story or poem, the thing itself was already alive in his brain,
with the end in sight and the means of realizing that end in his
conscious possession.  Otherwise the effort was doomed to failure.  On
the other hand, he appreciated the chance effects in words and phrases
that came lightly and easily into his brain, and that later stood all
tests of beauty and power and developed tremendous and incommunicable
connotations.  Before such he bowed down and marvelled, knowing that they
were beyond the deliberate creation of any man.  And no matter how much
he dissected beauty in search of the principles that underlie beauty and
make beauty possible, he was aware, always, of the innermost mystery of
beauty to which he did not penetrate and to which no man had ever
penetrated.  He knew full well, from his Spencer, that man can never
attain ultimate knowledge of anything, and that the mystery of beauty was
no less than that of life--nay, more that the fibres of beauty and life
were intertwisted, and that he himself was but a bit of the same
nonunderstandable fabric, twisted of sunshine and star-dust and wonder.

In fact, it was when filled with these thoughts that he wrote his essay
entitled "Star-dust," in which he had his fling, not at the principles of
criticism, but at the principal critics.  It was brilliant, deep,
philosophical, and deliciously touched with laughter.  Also it was
promptly rejected by the magazines as often as it was submitted.  But
having cleared his mind of it, he went serenely on his way.  It was a
habit he developed, of incubating and maturing his thought upon a
subject, and of then rushing into the type-writer with it.  That it did
not see print was a matter of small moment with him.  The writing of it
was the culminating act of a long mental process, the drawing together of
scattered threads of thought and the final generalizing upon all the data
with which his mind was burdened.  To write such an article was the
conscious effort by which he freed his mind and made it ready for fresh
material and problems.  It was in a way akin to that common habit of men
and women troubled by real or fancied grievances, who periodically and
volubly break their long-suffering silence and "have their say" till the
last word is said.


