

CHAPTER XXIV


The weeks passed.  Martin ran out of money, and publishers' checks were
far away as ever.  All his important manuscripts had come back and been
started out again, and his hack-work fared no better.  His little kitchen
was no longer graced with a variety of foods.  Caught in the pinch with a
part sack of rice and a few pounds of dried apricots, rice and apricots
was his menu three times a day for five days hand-running.  Then he
startled to realize on his credit.  The Portuguese grocer, to whom he had
hitherto paid cash, called a halt when Martin's bill reached the
magnificent total of three dollars and eighty-five cents.

"For you see," said the grocer, "you no catcha da work, I losa da mon'."

And Martin could reply nothing.  There was no way of explaining.  It was
not true business principle to allow credit to a strong-bodied young
fellow of the working-class who was too lazy to work.

"You catcha da job, I let you have mora da grub," the grocer assured
Martin.  "No job, no grub.  Thata da business."  And then, to show that
it was purely business foresight and not prejudice, "Hava da drink on da
house--good friends justa da same."

So Martin drank, in his easy way, to show that he was good friends with
the house, and then went supperless to bed.

The fruit store, where Martin had bought his vegetables, was run by an
American whose business principles were so weak that he let Martin run a
bill of five dollars before stopping his credit.  The baker stopped at
two dollars, and the butcher at four dollars.  Martin added his debts and
found that he was possessed of a total credit in all the world of
fourteen dollars and eighty-five cents.  He was up with his type-writer
rent, but he estimated that he could get two months' credit on that,
which would be eight dollars.  When that occurred, he would have
exhausted all possible credit.

The last purchase from the fruit store had been a sack of potatoes, and
for a week he had potatoes, and nothing but potatoes, three times a day.
An occasional dinner at Ruth's helped to keep strength in his body,
though he found it tantalizing enough to refuse further helping when his
appetite was raging at sight of so much food spread before it.  Now and
again, though afflicted with secret shame, he dropped in at his sister's
at meal-time and ate as much as he dared--more than he dared at the Morse
table.

Day by day he worked on, and day by day the postman delivered to him
rejected manuscripts.  He had no money for stamps, so the manuscripts
accumulated in a heap under the table.  Came a day when for forty hours
he had not tasted food.  He could not hope for a meal at Ruth's, for she
was away to San Rafael on a two weeks' visit; and for very shame's sake
he could not go to his sister's.  To cap misfortune, the postman, in his
afternoon round, brought him five returned manuscripts.  Then it was that
Martin wore his overcoat down into Oakland, and came back without it, but
with five dollars tinkling in his pocket.  He paid a dollar each on
account to the four tradesmen, and in his kitchen fried steak and onions,
made coffee, and stewed a large pot of prunes.  And having dined, he sat
down at his table-desk and completed before midnight an essay which he
entitled "The Dignity of Usury."  Having typed it out, he flung it under
the table, for there had been nothing left from the five dollars with
which to buy stamps.

Later on he pawned his watch, and still later his wheel, reducing the
amount available for food by putting stamps on all his manuscripts and
sending them out.  He was disappointed with his hack-work.  Nobody cared
to buy.  He compared it with what he found in the newspapers, weeklies,
and cheap magazines, and decided that his was better, far better, than
the average; yet it would not sell.  Then he discovered that most of the
newspapers printed a great deal of what was called "plate" stuff, and he
got the address of the association that furnished it.  His own work that
he sent in was returned, along with a stereotyped slip informing him that
the staff supplied all the copy that was needed.

In one of the great juvenile periodicals he noted whole columns of
incident and anecdote.  Here was a chance.  His paragraphs were returned,
and though he tried repeatedly he never succeeded in placing one.  Later
on, when it no longer mattered, he learned that the associate editors and
sub-editors augmented their salaries by supplying those paragraphs
themselves.  The comic weeklies returned his jokes and humorous verse,
and the light society verse he wrote for the large magazines found no
abiding-place.  Then there was the newspaper storiette.  He knew that he
could write better ones than were published.  Managing to obtain the
addresses of two newspaper syndicates, he deluged them with storiettes.
When he had written twenty and failed to place one of them, he ceased.
And yet, from day to day, he read storiettes in the dailies and weeklies,
scores and scores of storiettes, not one of which would compare with his.
In his despondency, he concluded that he had no judgment whatever, that
he was hypnotized by what he wrote, and that he was a self-deluded
pretender.

The inhuman editorial machine ran smoothly as ever.  He folded the stamps
in with his manuscript, dropped it into the letter-box, and from three
weeks to a month afterward the postman came up the steps and handed him
the manuscript.  Surely there were no live, warm editors at the other
end.  It was all wheels and cogs and oil-cups--a clever mechanism
operated by automatons.  He reached stages of despair wherein he doubted
if editors existed at all.  He had never received a sign of the existence
of one, and from absence of judgment in rejecting all he wrote it seemed
plausible that editors were myths, manufactured and maintained by office
boys, typesetters, and pressmen.

The hours he spent with Ruth were the only happy ones he had, and they
were not all happy.  He was afflicted always with a gnawing restlessness,
more tantalizing than in the old days before he possessed her love; for
now that he did possess her love, the possession of her was far away as
ever.  He had asked for two years; time was flying, and he was achieving
nothing.  Again, he was always conscious of the fact that she did not
approve what he was doing.  She did not say so directly.  Yet indirectly
she let him understand it as clearly and definitely as she could have
spoken it.  It was not resentment with her, but disapproval; though less
sweet-natured women might have resented where she was no more than
disappointed.  Her disappointment lay in that this man she had taken to
mould, refused to be moulded.  To a certain extent she had found his clay
plastic, then it had developed stubbornness, declining to be shaped in
the image of her father or of Mr. Butler.

What was great and strong in him, she missed, or, worse yet,
misunderstood.  This man, whose clay was so plastic that he could live in
any number of pigeonholes of human existence, she thought wilful and most
obstinate because she could not shape him to live in her pigeonhole,
which was the only one she knew.  She could not follow the flights of his
mind, and when his brain got beyond her, she deemed him erratic.  Nobody
else's brain ever got beyond her.  She could always follow her father and
mother, her brothers and Olney; wherefore, when she could not follow
Martin, she believed the fault lay with him.  It was the old tragedy of
insularity trying to serve as mentor to the universal.

"You worship at the shrine of the established," he told her once, in a
discussion they had over Praps and Vanderwater.  "I grant that as
authorities to quote they are most excellent--the two foremost literary
critics in the United States.  Every school teacher in the land looks up
to Vanderwater as the Dean of American criticism.  Yet I read his stuff,
and it seems to me the perfection of the felicitous expression of the
inane.  Why, he is no more than a ponderous bromide, thanks to Gelett
Burgess.  And Praps is no better.  His 'Hemlock Mosses,' for instance is
beautifully written.  Not a comma is out of place; and the tone--ah!--is
lofty, so lofty.  He is the best-paid critic in the United States.
Though, Heaven forbid! he's not a critic at all.  They do criticism
better in England.

"But the point is, they sound the popular note, and they sound it so
beautifully and morally and contentedly.  Their reviews remind me of a
British Sunday.  They are the popular mouthpieces.  They back up your
professors of English, and your professors of English back them up.  And
there isn't an original idea in any of their skulls.  They know only the
established,--in fact, they are the established.  They are weak minded,
and the established impresses itself upon them as easily as the name of
the brewery is impressed on a beer bottle.  And their function is to
catch all the young fellows attending the university, to drive out of
their minds any glimmering originality that may chance to be there, and
to put upon them the stamp of the established."

"I think I am nearer the truth," she replied, "when I stand by the
established, than you are, raging around like an iconoclastic South Sea
Islander."

"It was the missionary who did the image breaking," he laughed.  "And
unfortunately, all the missionaries are off among the heathen, so there
are none left at home to break those old images, Mr. Vanderwater and Mr.
Praps."

"And the college professors, as well," she added.

He shook his head emphatically.  "No; the science professors should live.
They're really great.  But it would be a good deed to break the heads of
nine-tenths of the English professors--little, microscopic-minded
parrots!"

Which was rather severe on the professors, but which to Ruth was
blasphemy.  She could not help but measure the professors, neat,
scholarly, in fitting clothes, speaking in well-modulated voices,
breathing of culture and refinement, with this almost indescribable young
fellow whom somehow she loved, whose clothes never would fit him, whose
heavy muscles told of damning toil, who grew excited when he talked,
substituting abuse for calm statement and passionate utterance for cool
self-possession.  They at least earned good salaries and were--yes, she
compelled herself to face it--were gentlemen; while he could not earn a
penny, and he was not as they.

She did not weigh Martin's words nor judge his argument by them.  Her
conclusion that his argument was wrong was reached--unconsciously, it is
true--by a comparison of externals.  They, the professors, were right in
their literary judgments because they were successes.  Martin's literary
judgments were wrong because he could not sell his wares.  To use his own
phrase, they made good, and he did not make good.  And besides, it did
not seem reasonable that he should be right--he who had stood, so short a
time before, in that same living room, blushing and awkward,
acknowledging his introduction, looking fearfully about him at the bric-a-
brac his swinging shoulders threatened to break, asking how long since
Swinburne died, and boastfully announcing that he had read "Excelsior"
and the "Psalm of Life."

Unwittingly, Ruth herself proved his point that she worshipped the
established.  Martin followed the processes of her thoughts, but forbore
to go farther.  He did not love her for what she thought of Praps and
Vanderwater and English professors, and he was coming to realize, with
increasing conviction, that he possessed brain-areas and stretches of
knowledge which she could never comprehend nor know existed.

In music she thought him unreasonable, and in the matter of opera not
only unreasonable but wilfully perverse.

"How did you like it?" she asked him one night, on the way home from the
opera.

It was a night when he had taken her at the expense of a month's rigid
economizing on food.  After vainly waiting for him to speak about it,
herself still tremulous and stirred by what she had just seen and heard,
she had asked the question.

"I liked the overture," was his answer.  "It was splendid."

"Yes, but the opera itself?"

"That was splendid too; that is, the orchestra was, though I'd have
enjoyed it more if those jumping-jacks had kept quiet or gone off the
stage."

Ruth was aghast.

"You don't mean Tetralani or Barillo?" she queried.

"All of them--the whole kit and crew."

"But they are great artists," she protested.

"They spoiled the music just the same, with their antics and
unrealities."

"But don't you like Barillo's voice?" Ruth asked.  "He is next to Caruso,
they say."

"Of course I liked him, and I liked Tetralani even better.  Her voice is
exquisite--or at least I think so."

"But, but--" Ruth stammered.  "I don't know what you mean, then.  You
admire their voices, yet say they spoiled the music."

"Precisely that.  I'd give anything to hear them in concert, and I'd give
even a bit more not to hear them when the orchestra is playing.  I'm
afraid I am a hopeless realist.  Great singers are not great actors.  To
hear Barillo sing a love passage with the voice of an angel, and to hear
Tetralani reply like another angel, and to hear it all accompanied by a
perfect orgy of glowing and colorful music--is ravishing, most ravishing.
I do not admit it.  I assert it.  But the whole effect is spoiled when I
look at them--at Tetralani, five feet ten in her stocking feet and
weighing a hundred and ninety pounds, and at Barillo, a scant five feet
four, greasy-featured, with the chest of a squat, undersized blacksmith,
and at the pair of them, attitudinizing, clasping their breasts, flinging
their arms in the air like demented creatures in an asylum; and when I am
expected to accept all this as the faithful illusion of a love-scene
between a slender and beautiful princess and a handsome, romantic, young
prince--why, I can't accept it, that's all.  It's rot; it's absurd; it's
unreal.  That's what's the matter with it.  It's not real.  Don't tell me
that anybody in this world ever made love that way.  Why, if I'd made
love to you in such fashion, you'd have boxed my ears."

"But you misunderstand," Ruth protested.  "Every form of art has its
limitations."  (She was busy recalling a lecture she had heard at the
university on the conventions of the arts.)  "In painting there are only
two dimensions to the canvas, yet you accept the illusion of three
dimensions which the art of a painter enables him to throw into the
canvas.  In writing, again, the author must be omnipotent.  You accept as
perfectly legitimate the author's account of the secret thoughts of the
heroine, and yet all the time you know that the heroine was alone when
thinking these thoughts, and that neither the author nor any one else was
capable of hearing them.  And so with the stage, with sculpture, with
opera, with every art form.  Certain irreconcilable things must be
accepted."

"Yes, I understood that," Martin answered.  "All the arts have their
conventions."  (Ruth was surprised at his use of the word.  It was as if
he had studied at the university himself, instead of being ill-equipped
from browsing at haphazard through the books in the library.)  "But even
the conventions must be real.  Trees, painted on flat cardboard and stuck
up on each side of the stage, we accept as a forest.  It is a real enough
convention.  But, on the other hand, we would not accept a sea scene as a
forest.  We can't do it.  It violates our senses.  Nor would you, or,
rather, should you, accept the ravings and writhings and agonized
contortions of those two lunatics to-night as a convincing portrayal of
love."

"But you don't hold yourself superior to all the judges of music?" she
protested.

"No, no, not for a moment.  I merely maintain my right as an individual.
I have just been telling you what I think, in order to explain why the
elephantine gambols of Madame Tetralani spoil the orchestra for me.  The
world's judges of music may all be right.  But I am I, and I won't
subordinate my taste to the unanimous judgment of mankind.  If I don't
like a thing, I don't like it, that's all; and there is no reason under
the sun why I should ape a liking for it just because the majority of my
fellow-creatures like it, or make believe they like it.  I can't follow
the fashions in the things I like or dislike."

"But music, you know, is a matter of training," Ruth argued; "and opera
is even more a matter of training.  May it not be--"

"That I am not trained in opera?" he dashed in.

She nodded.

"The very thing," he agreed.  "And I consider I am fortunate in not
having been caught when I was young.  If I had, I could have wept
sentimental tears to-night, and the clownish antics of that precious pair
would have but enhanced the beauty of their voices and the beauty of the
accompanying orchestra.  You are right.  It's mostly a matter of
training.  And I am too old, now.  I must have the real or nothing.  An
illusion that won't convince is a palpable lie, and that's what grand
opera is to me when little Barillo throws a fit, clutches mighty
Tetralani in his arms (also in a fit), and tells her how passionately he
adores her."

Again Ruth measured his thoughts by comparison of externals and in
accordance with her belief in the established.  Who was he that he should
be right and all the cultured world wrong?  His words and thoughts made
no impression upon her.  She was too firmly intrenched in the established
to have any sympathy with revolutionary ideas.  She had always been used
to music, and she had enjoyed opera ever since she was a child, and all
her world had enjoyed it, too.  Then by what right did Martin Eden
emerge, as he had so recently emerged, from his rag-time and
working-class songs, and pass judgment on the world's music?  She was
vexed with him, and as she walked beside him she had a vague feeling of
outrage.  At the best, in her most charitable frame of mind, she
considered the statement of his views to be a caprice, an erratic and
uncalled-for prank.  But when he took her in his arms at the door and
kissed her good night in tender lover-fashion, she forgot everything in
the outrush of her own love to him.  And later, on a sleepless pillow,
she puzzled, as she had often puzzled of late, as to how it was that she
loved so strange a man, and loved him despite the disapproval of her
people.

And next day Martin Eden cast hack-work aside, and at white heat hammered
out an essay to which he gave the title, "The Philosophy of Illusion."  A
stamp started it on its travels, but it was destined to receive many
stamps and to be started on many travels in the months that followed.


