

CHAPTER XXVI


Martin Eden did not go out to hunt for a job in the morning.  It was late
afternoon before he came out of his delirium and gazed with aching eyes
about the room.  Mary, one of the tribe of Silva, eight years old,
keeping watch, raised a screech at sight of his returning consciousness.
Maria hurried into the room from the kitchen.  She put her work-calloused
hand upon his hot forehead and felt his pulse.

"You lika da eat?" she asked.

He shook his head.  Eating was farthest from his desire, and he wondered
that he should ever have been hungry in his life.

"I'm sick, Maria," he said weakly.  "What is it?  Do you know?"

"Grip," she answered.  "Two or three days you alla da right.  Better you
no eat now.  Bimeby plenty can eat, to-morrow can eat maybe."

Martin was not used to sickness, and when Maria and her little girl left
him, he essayed to get up and dress.  By a supreme exertion of will, with
rearing brain and eyes that ached so that he could not keep them open, he
managed to get out of bed, only to be left stranded by his senses upon
the table.  Half an hour later he managed to regain the bed, where he was
content to lie with closed eyes and analyze his various pains and
weaknesses.  Maria came in several times to change the cold cloths on his
forehead.  Otherwise she left him in peace, too wise to vex him with
chatter.  This moved him to gratitude, and he murmured to himself,
"Maria, you getta da milka ranch, all righta, all right."

Then he remembered his long-buried past of yesterday.

It seemed a life-time since he had received that letter from the
Transcontinental, a life-time since it was all over and done with and a
new page turned.  He had shot his bolt, and shot it hard, and now he was
down on his back.  If he hadn't starved himself, he wouldn't have been
caught by La Grippe.  He had been run down, and he had not had the
strength to throw off the germ of disease which had invaded his system.
This was what resulted.

"What does it profit a man to write a whole library and lose his own
life?" he demanded aloud.  "This is no place for me.  No more literature
in mine.  Me for the counting-house and ledger, the monthly salary, and
the little home with Ruth."

Two days later, having eaten an egg and two slices of toast and drunk a
cup of tea, he asked for his mail, but found his eyes still hurt too much
to permit him to read.

"You read for me, Maria," he said.  "Never mind the big, long letters.
Throw them under the table.  Read me the small letters."

"No can," was the answer.  "Teresa, she go to school, she can."

So Teresa Silva, aged nine, opened his letters and read them to him.  He
listened absently to a long dun from the type-writer people, his mind
busy with ways and means of finding a job.  Suddenly he was shocked back
to himself.

"'We offer you forty dollars for all serial rights in your story,'"
Teresa slowly spelled out, "'provided you allow us to make the
alterations suggested.'"

"What magazine is that?" Martin shouted.  "Here, give it to me!"

He could see to read, now, and he was unaware of the pain of the action.
It was the White Mouse that was offering him forty dollars, and the story
was "The Whirlpool," another of his early horror stories.  He read the
letter through again and again.  The editor told him plainly that he had
not handled the idea properly, but that it was the idea they were buying
because it was original.  If they could cut the story down one-third,
they would take it and send him forty dollars on receipt of his answer.

He called for pen and ink, and told the editor he could cut the story
down three-thirds if he wanted to, and to send the forty dollars right
along.

The letter despatched to the letter-box by Teresa, Martin lay back and
thought.  It wasn't a lie, after all.  The White Mouse paid on
acceptance.  There were three thousand words in "The Whirlpool."  Cut
down a third, there would be two thousand.  At forty dollars that would
be two cents a word.  Pay on acceptance and two cents a word--the
newspapers had told the truth.  And he had thought the White Mouse a
third-rater!  It was evident that he did not know the magazines.  He had
deemed the Transcontinental a first-rater, and it paid a cent for ten
words.  He had classed the White Mouse as of no account, and it paid
twenty times as much as the Transcontinental and also had paid on
acceptance.

Well, there was one thing certain: when he got well, he would not go out
looking for a job.  There were more stories in his head as good as "The
Whirlpool," and at forty dollars apiece he could earn far more than in
any job or position.  Just when he thought the battle lost, it was won.
He had proved for his career.  The way was clear.  Beginning with the
White Mouse he would add magazine after magazine to his growing list of
patrons.  Hack-work could be put aside.  For that matter, it had been
wasted time, for it had not brought him a dollar.  He would devote
himself to work, good work, and he would pour out the best that was in
him.  He wished Ruth was there to share in his joy, and when he went over
the letters left lying on his bed, he found one from her.  It was sweetly
reproachful, wondering what had kept him away for so dreadful a length of
time.  He reread the letter adoringly, dwelling over her handwriting,
loving each stroke of her pen, and in the end kissing her signature.

And when he answered, he told her recklessly that he had not been to see
her because his best clothes were in pawn.  He told her that he had been
sick, but was once more nearly well, and that inside ten days or two
weeks (as soon as a letter could travel to New York City and return) he
would redeem his clothes and be with her.

But Ruth did not care to wait ten days or two weeks.  Besides, her lover
was sick.  The next afternoon, accompanied by Arthur, she arrived in the
Morse carriage, to the unqualified delight of the Silva tribe and of all
the urchins on the street, and to the consternation of Maria.  She boxed
the ears of the Silvas who crowded about the visitors on the tiny front
porch, and in more than usual atrocious English tried to apologize for
her appearance.  Sleeves rolled up from soap-flecked arms and a wet gunny-
sack around her waist told of the task at which she had been caught.  So
flustered was she by two such grand young people asking for her lodger,
that she forgot to invite them to sit down in the little parlor.  To
enter Martin's room, they passed through the kitchen, warm and moist and
steamy from the big washing in progress.  Maria, in her excitement,
jammed the bedroom and bedroom-closet doors together, and for five
minutes, through the partly open door, clouds of steam, smelling of soap-
suds and dirt, poured into the sick chamber.

Ruth succeeded in veering right and left and right again, and in running
the narrow passage between table and bed to Martin's side; but Arthur
veered too wide and fetched up with clatter and bang of pots and pans in
the corner where Martin did his cooking.  Arthur did not linger long.
Ruth occupied the only chair, and having done his duty, he went outside
and stood by the gate, the centre of seven marvelling Silvas, who watched
him as they would have watched a curiosity in a side-show.  All about the
carriage were gathered the children from a dozen blocks, waiting and
eager for some tragic and terrible denouement.  Carriages were seen on
their street only for weddings and funerals.  Here was neither marriage
nor death: therefore, it was something transcending experience and well
worth waiting for.

Martin had been wild to see Ruth.  His was essentially a love-nature, and
he possessed more than the average man's need for sympathy.  He was
starving for sympathy, which, with him, meant intelligent understanding;
and he had yet to learn that Ruth's sympathy was largely sentimental and
tactful, and that it proceeded from gentleness of nature rather than from
understanding of the objects of her sympathy.  So it was while Martin
held her hand and gladly talked, that her love for him prompted her to
press his hand in return, and that her eyes were moist and luminous at
sight of his helplessness and of the marks suffering had stamped upon his
face.

But while he told her of his two acceptances, of his despair when he
received the one from the Transcontinental, and of the corresponding
delight with which he received the one from the White Mouse, she did not
follow him.  She heard the words he uttered and understood their literal
import, but she was not with him in his despair and his delight.  She
could not get out of herself.  She was not interested in selling stories
to magazines.  What was important to her was matrimony.  She was not
aware of it, however, any more than she was aware that her desire that
Martin take a position was the instinctive and preparative impulse of
motherhood.  She would have blushed had she been told as much in plain,
set terms, and next, she might have grown indignant and asserted that her
sole interest lay in the man she loved and her desire for him to make the
best of himself.  So, while Martin poured out his heart to her, elated
with the first success his chosen work in the world had received, she
paid heed to his bare words only, gazing now and again about the room,
shocked by what she saw.

For the first time Ruth gazed upon the sordid face of poverty.  Starving
lovers had always seemed romantic to her,--but she had had no idea how
starving lovers lived.  She had never dreamed it could be like this.  Ever
her gaze shifted from the room to him and back again.  The steamy smell
of dirty clothes, which had entered with her from the kitchen, was
sickening.  Martin must be soaked with it, Ruth concluded, if that awful
woman washed frequently.  Such was the contagiousness of degradation.
When she looked at Martin, she seemed to see the smirch left upon him by
his surroundings.  She had never seen him unshaven, and the three days'
growth of beard on his face was repulsive to her.  Not alone did it give
him the same dark and murky aspect of the Silva house, inside and out,
but it seemed to emphasize that animal-like strength of his which she
detested.  And here he was, being confirmed in his madness by the two
acceptances he took such pride in telling her about.  A little longer and
he would have surrendered and gone to work.  Now he would continue on in
this horrible house, writing and starving for a few more months.

"What is that smell?" she asked suddenly.

"Some of Maria's washing smells, I imagine," was the answer.  "I am
growing quite accustomed to them."

"No, no; not that.  It is something else.  A stale, sickish smell."

Martin sampled the air before replying.

"I can't smell anything else, except stale tobacco smoke," he announced.

"That's it.  It is terrible.  Why do you smoke so much, Martin?"

"I don't know, except that I smoke more than usual when I am lonely.  And
then, too, it's such a long-standing habit.  I learned when I was only a
youngster."

"It is not a nice habit, you know," she reproved.  "It smells to heaven."

"That's the fault of the tobacco.  I can afford only the cheapest.  But
wait until I get that forty-dollar check.  I'll use a brand that is not
offensive even to the angels.  But that wasn't so bad, was it, two
acceptances in three days?  That forty-five dollars will pay about all my
debts."

"For two years' work?" she queried.

"No, for less than a week's work.  Please pass me that book over on the
far corner of the table, the account book with the gray cover."  He
opened it and began turning over the pages rapidly.  "Yes, I was right.
Four days for 'The Ring of Bells,' two days for 'The Whirlpool.'  That's
forty-five dollars for a week's work, one hundred and eighty dollars a
month.  That beats any salary I can command.  And, besides, I'm just
beginning.  A thousand dollars a month is not too much to buy for you all
I want you to have.  A salary of five hundred a month would be too small.
That forty-five dollars is just a starter.  Wait till I get my stride.
Then watch my smoke."

Ruth misunderstood his slang, and reverted to cigarettes.

"You smoke more than enough as it is, and the brand of tobacco will make
no difference.  It is the smoking itself that is not nice, no matter what
the brand may be.  You are a chimney, a living volcano, a perambulating
smoke-stack, and you are a perfect disgrace, Martin dear, you know you
are."

She leaned toward him, entreaty in her eyes, and as he looked at her
delicate face and into her pure, limpid eyes, as of old he was struck
with his own unworthiness.

"I wish you wouldn't smoke any more," she whispered.  "Please, for--my
sake."

"All right, I won't," he cried.  "I'll do anything you ask, dear love,
anything; you know that."

A great temptation assailed her.  In an insistent way she had caught
glimpses of the large, easy-going side of his nature, and she felt sure,
if she asked him to cease attempting to write, that he would grant her
wish.  In the swift instant that elapsed, the words trembled on her lips.
But she did not utter them.  She was not quite brave enough; she did not
quite dare.  Instead, she leaned toward him to meet him, and in his arms
murmured:-

"You know, it is really not for my sake, Martin, but for your own.  I am
sure smoking hurts you; and besides, it is not good to be a slave to
anything, to a drug least of all."

"I shall always be your slave," he smiled.

"In which case, I shall begin issuing my commands."

She looked at him mischievously, though deep down she was already
regretting that she had not preferred her largest request.

"I live but to obey, your majesty."

"Well, then, my first commandment is, Thou shalt not omit to shave every
day.  Look how you have scratched my cheek."

And so it ended in caresses and love-laughter.  But she had made one
point, and she could not expect to make more than one at a time.  She
felt a woman's pride in that she had made him stop smoking.  Another time
she would persuade him to take a position, for had he not said he would
do anything she asked?

She left his side to explore the room, examining the clothes-lines of
notes overhead, learning the mystery of the tackle used for suspending
his wheel under the ceiling, and being saddened by the heap of
manuscripts under the table which represented to her just so much wasted
time.  The oil-stove won her admiration, but on investigating the food
shelves she found them empty.

"Why, you haven't anything to eat, you poor dear," she said with tender
compassion.  "You must be starving."

"I store my food in Maria's safe and in her pantry," he lied.  "It keeps
better there.  No danger of my starving.  Look at that."

She had come back to his side, and she saw him double his arm at the
elbow, the biceps crawling under his shirt-sleeve and swelling into a
knot of muscle, heavy and hard.  The sight repelled her.  Sentimentally,
she disliked it.  But her pulse, her blood, every fibre of her, loved it
and yearned for it, and, in the old, inexplicable way, she leaned toward
him, not away from him.  And in the moment that followed, when he crushed
her in his arms, the brain of her, concerned with the superficial aspects
of life, was in revolt; while the heart of her, the woman of her,
concerned with life itself, exulted triumphantly.  It was in moments like
this that she felt to the uttermost the greatness of her love for Martin,
for it was almost a swoon of delight to her to feel his strong arms about
her, holding her tightly, hurting her with the grip of their fervor.  At
such moments she found justification for her treason to her standards,
for her violation of her own high ideals, and, most of all, for her tacit
disobedience to her mother and father.  They did not want her to marry
this man.  It shocked them that she should love him.  It shocked her,
too, sometimes, when she was apart from him, a cool and reasoning
creature.  With him, she loved him--in truth, at times a vexed and
worried love; but love it was, a love that was stronger than she.

"This La Grippe is nothing," he was saying.  "It hurts a bit, and gives
one a nasty headache, but it doesn't compare with break-bone fever."

"Have you had that, too?" she queried absently, intent on the heaven-sent
justification she was finding in his arms.

And so, with absent queries, she led him on, till suddenly his words
startled her.

He had had the fever in a secret colony of thirty lepers on one of the
Hawaiian Islands.

"But why did you go there?" she demanded.

Such royal carelessness of body seemed criminal.

"Because I didn't know," he answered.  "I never dreamed of lepers.  When
I deserted the schooner and landed on the beach, I headed inland for some
place of hiding.  For three days I lived off guavas, ohia-apples, and
bananas, all of which grew wild in the jungle.  On the fourth day I found
the trail--a mere foot-trail.  It led inland, and it led up.  It was the
way I wanted to go, and it showed signs of recent travel.  At one place
it ran along the crest of a ridge that was no more than a knife-edge.  The
trail wasn't three feet wide on the crest, and on either side the ridge
fell away in precipices hundreds of feet deep.  One man, with plenty of
ammunition, could have held it against a hundred thousand.

"It was the only way in to the hiding-place.  Three hours after I found
the trail I was there, in a little mountain valley, a pocket in the midst
of lava peaks.  The whole place was terraced for taro-patches, fruit
trees grew there, and there were eight or ten grass huts.  But as soon as
I saw the inhabitants I knew what I'd struck.  One sight of them was
enough."

"What did you do?" Ruth demanded breathlessly, listening, like any
Desdemona, appalled and fascinated.

"Nothing for me to do.  Their leader was a kind old fellow, pretty far
gone, but he ruled like a king.  He had discovered the little valley and
founded the settlement--all of which was against the law.  But he had
guns, plenty of ammunition, and those Kanakas, trained to the shooting of
wild cattle and wild pig, were dead shots.  No, there wasn't any running
away for Martin Eden.  He stayed--for three months."

"But how did you escape?"

"I'd have been there yet, if it hadn't been for a girl there, a
half-Chinese, quarter-white, and quarter-Hawaiian.  She was a beauty,
poor thing, and well educated.  Her mother, in Honolulu, was worth a
million or so.  Well, this girl got me away at last.  Her mother financed
the settlement, you see, so the girl wasn't afraid of being punished for
letting me go.  But she made me swear, first, never to reveal the hiding-
place; and I never have.  This is the first time I have even mentioned
it.  The girl had just the first signs of leprosy.  The fingers of her
right hand were slightly twisted, and there was a small spot on her arm.
That was all.  I guess she is dead, now."

"But weren't you frightened?  And weren't you glad to get away without
catching that dreadful disease?"

"Well," he confessed, "I was a bit shivery at first; but I got used to
it.  I used to feel sorry for that poor girl, though.  That made me
forget to be afraid.  She was such a beauty, in spirit as well as in
appearance, and she was only slightly touched; yet she was doomed to lie
there, living the life of a primitive savage and rotting slowly away.
Leprosy is far more terrible than you can imagine it."

"Poor thing," Ruth murmured softly.  "It's a wonder she let you get
away."

"How do you mean?" Martin asked unwittingly.

"Because she must have loved you," Ruth said, still softly.  "Candidly,
now, didn't she?"

Martin's sunburn had been bleached by his work in the laundry and by the
indoor life he was living, while the hunger and the sickness had made his
face even pale; and across this pallor flowed the slow wave of a blush.
He was opening his mouth to speak, but Ruth shut him off.

"Never mind, don't answer; it's not necessary," she laughed.

But it seemed to him there was something metallic in her laughter, and
that the light in her eyes was cold.  On the spur of the moment it
reminded him of a gale he had once experienced in the North Pacific.  And
for the moment the apparition of the gale rose before his eyes--a gale at
night, with a clear sky and under a full moon, the huge seas glinting
coldly in the moonlight.  Next, he saw the girl in the leper refuge and
remembered it was for love of him that she had let him go.

"She was noble," he said simply.  "She gave me life."

That was all of the incident, but he heard Ruth muffle a dry sob in her
throat, and noticed that she turned her face away to gaze out of the
window.  When she turned it back to him, it was composed, and there was
no hint of the gale in her eyes.

"I'm such a silly," she said plaintively.  "But I can't help it.  I do so
love you, Martin, I do, I do.  I shall grow more catholic in time, but at
present I can't help being jealous of those ghosts of the past, and you
know your past is full of ghosts."

"It must be," she silenced his protest.  "It could not be otherwise.  And
there's poor Arthur motioning me to come.  He's tired waiting.  And now
good-by, dear."

"There's some kind of a mixture, put up by the druggists, that helps men
to stop the use of tobacco," she called back from the door, "and I am
going to send you some."

The door closed, but opened again.

"I do, I do," she whispered to him; and this time she was really gone.

Maria, with worshipful eyes that none the less were keen to note the
texture of Ruth's garments and the cut of them (a cut unknown that
produced an effect mysteriously beautiful), saw her to the carriage.  The
crowd of disappointed urchins stared till the carriage disappeared from
view, then transferred their stare to Maria, who had abruptly become the
most important person on the street.  But it was one of her progeny who
blasted Maria's reputation by announcing that the grand visitors had been
for her lodger.  After that Maria dropped back into her old obscurity and
Martin began to notice the respectful manner in which he was regarded by
the small fry of the neighborhood.  As for Maria, Martin rose in her
estimation a full hundred per cent, and had the Portuguese grocer
witnessed that afternoon carriage-call he would have allowed Martin an
additional three-dollars-and-eighty-five-cents' worth of credit.


