

CHAPTER XXVII


The sun of Martin's good fortune rose.  The day after Ruth's visit, he
received a check for three dollars from a New York scandal weekly in
payment for three of his triolets.  Two days later a newspaper published
in Chicago accepted his "Treasure Hunters," promising to pay ten dollars
for it on publication.  The price was small, but it was the first article
he had written, his very first attempt to express his thought on the
printed page.  To cap everything, the adventure serial for boys, his
second attempt, was accepted before the end of the week by a juvenile
monthly calling itself Youth and Age.  It was true the serial was twenty-
one thousand words, and they offered to pay him sixteen dollars on
publication, which was something like seventy-five cents a thousand
words; but it was equally true that it was the second thing he had
attempted to write and that he was himself thoroughly aware of its clumsy
worthlessness.

But even his earliest efforts were not marked with the clumsiness of
mediocrity.  What characterized them was the clumsiness of too great
strength--the clumsiness which the tyro betrays when he crushes
butterflies with battering rams and hammers out vignettes with a
war-club.  So it was that Martin was glad to sell his early efforts for
songs.  He knew them for what they were, and it had not taken him long to
acquire this knowledge.  What he pinned his faith to was his later work.
He had striven to be something more than a mere writer of magazine
fiction.  He had sought to equip himself with the tools of artistry.  On
the other hand, he had not sacrificed strength.  His conscious aim had
been to increase his strength by avoiding excess of strength.  Nor had he
departed from his love of reality.  His work was realism, though he had
endeavored to fuse with it the fancies and beauties of imagination.  What
he sought was an impassioned realism, shot through with human aspiration
and faith.  What he wanted was life as it was, with all its
spirit-groping and soul-reaching left in.

He had discovered, in the course of his reading, two schools of fiction.
One treated of man as a god, ignoring his earthly origin; the other
treated of man as a clod, ignoring his heaven-sent dreams and divine
possibilities.  Both the god and the clod schools erred, in Martin's
estimation, and erred through too great singleness of sight and purpose.
There was a compromise that approximated the truth, though it flattered
not the school of god, while it challenged the brute-savageness of the
school of clod.  It was his story, "Adventure," which had dragged with
Ruth, that Martin believed had achieved his ideal of the true in fiction;
and it was in an essay, "God and Clod," that he had expressed his views
on the whole general subject.

But "Adventure," and all that he deemed his best work, still went begging
among the editors.  His early work counted for nothing in his eyes except
for the money it brought, and his horror stories, two of which he had
sold, he did not consider high work nor his best work.  To him they were
frankly imaginative and fantastic, though invested with all the glamour
of the real, wherein lay their power.  This investiture of the grotesque
and impossible with reality, he looked upon as a trick--a skilful trick
at best.  Great literature could not reside in such a field.  Their
artistry was high, but he denied the worthwhileness of artistry when
divorced from humanness.  The trick had been to fling over the face of
his artistry a mask of humanness, and this he had done in the half-dozen
or so stories of the horror brand he had written before he emerged upon
the high peaks of "Adventure," "Joy," "The Pot," and "The Wine of Life."

The three dollars he received for the triolets he used to eke out a
precarious existence against the arrival of the White Mouse check.  He
cashed the first check with the suspicious Portuguese grocer, paying a
dollar on account and dividing the remaining two dollars between the
baker and the fruit store.  Martin was not yet rich enough to afford
meat, and he was on slim allowance when the White Mouse check arrived.  He
was divided on the cashing of it.  He had never been in a bank in his
life, much less been in one on business, and he had a naive and childlike
desire to walk into one of the big banks down in Oakland and fling down
his indorsed check for forty dollars.  On the other hand, practical
common sense ruled that he should cash it with his grocer and thereby
make an impression that would later result in an increase of credit.
Reluctantly Martin yielded to the claims of the grocer, paying his bill
with him in full, and receiving in change a pocketful of jingling coin.
Also, he paid the other tradesmen in full, redeemed his suit and his
bicycle, paid one month's rent on the type-writer, and paid Maria the
overdue month for his room and a month in advance.  This left him in his
pocket, for emergencies, a balance of nearly three dollars.

In itself, this small sum seemed a fortune.  Immediately on recovering
his clothes he had gone to see Ruth, and on the way he could not refrain
from jingling the little handful of silver in his pocket.  He had been so
long without money that, like a rescued starving man who cannot let the
unconsumed food out of his sight, Martin could not keep his hand off the
silver.  He was not mean, nor avaricious, but the money meant more than
so many dollars and cents.  It stood for success, and the eagles stamped
upon the coins were to him so many winged victories.

It came to him insensibly that it was a very good world.  It certainly
appeared more beautiful to him.  For weeks it had been a very dull and
sombre world; but now, with nearly all debts paid, three dollars jingling
in his pocket, and in his mind the consciousness of success, the sun
shone bright and warm, and even a rain-squall that soaked unprepared
pedestrians seemed a merry happening to him.  When he starved, his
thoughts had dwelt often upon the thousands he knew were starving the
world over; but now that he was feasted full, the fact of the thousands
starving was no longer pregnant in his brain.  He forgot about them, and,
being in love, remembered the countless lovers in the world.  Without
deliberately thinking about it, motifs for love-lyrics began to agitate
his brain.  Swept away by the creative impulse, he got off the electric
car, without vexation, two blocks beyond his crossing.

He found a number of persons in the Morse home.  Ruth's two girl-cousins
were visiting her from San Rafael, and Mrs. Morse, under pretext of
entertaining them, was pursuing her plan of surrounding Ruth with young
people.  The campaign had begun during Martin's enforced absence, and was
already in full swing.  She was making a point of having at the house men
who were doing things.  Thus, in addition to the cousins Dorothy and
Florence, Martin encountered two university professors, one of Latin, the
other of English; a young army officer just back from the Philippines,
one-time school-mate of Ruth's; a young fellow named Melville, private
secretary to Joseph Perkins, head of the San Francisco Trust Company; and
finally of the men, a live bank cashier, Charles Hapgood, a youngish man
of thirty-five, graduate of Stanford University, member of the Nile Club
and the Unity Club, and a conservative speaker for the Republican Party
during campaigns--in short, a rising young man in every way.  Among the
women was one who painted portraits, another who was a professional
musician, and still another who possessed the degree of Doctor of
Sociology and who was locally famous for her social settlement work in
the slums of San Francisco.  But the women did not count for much in Mrs.
Morse's plan.  At the best, they were necessary accessories.  The men who
did things must be drawn to the house somehow.

"Don't get excited when you talk," Ruth admonished Martin, before the
ordeal of introduction began.

He bore himself a bit stiffly at first, oppressed by a sense of his own
awkwardness, especially of his shoulders, which were up to their old
trick of threatening destruction to furniture and ornaments.  Also, he
was rendered self-conscious by the company.  He had never before been in
contact with such exalted beings nor with so many of them.  Melville, the
bank cashier, fascinated him, and he resolved to investigate him at the
first opportunity.  For underneath Martin's awe lurked his assertive ego,
and he felt the urge to measure himself with these men and women and to
find out what they had learned from the books and life which he had not
learned.

Ruth's eyes roved to him frequently to see how he was getting on, and she
was surprised and gladdened by the ease with which he got acquainted with
her cousins.  He certainly did not grow excited, while being seated
removed from him the worry of his shoulders.  Ruth knew them for clever
girls, superficially brilliant, and she could scarcely understand their
praise of Martin later that night at going to bed.  But he, on the other
hand, a wit in his own class, a gay quizzer and laughter-maker at dances
and Sunday picnics, had found the making of fun and the breaking of good-
natured lances simple enough in this environment.  And on this evening
success stood at his back, patting him on the shoulder and telling him
that he was making good, so that he could afford to laugh and make
laughter and remain unabashed.

Later, Ruth's anxiety found justification.  Martin and Professor Caldwell
had got together in a conspicuous corner, and though Martin no longer
wove the air with his hands, to Ruth's critical eye he permitted his own
eyes to flash and glitter too frequently, talked too rapidly and warmly,
grew too intense, and allowed his aroused blood to redden his cheeks too
much.  He lacked decorum and control, and was in decided contrast to the
young professor of English with whom he talked.

But Martin was not concerned with appearances!  He had been swift to note
the other's trained mind and to appreciate his command of knowledge.
Furthermore, Professor Caldwell did not realize Martin's concept of the
average English professor.  Martin wanted him to talk shop, and, though
he seemed averse at first, succeeded in making him do it.  For Martin did
not see why a man should not talk shop.

"It's absurd and unfair," he had told Ruth weeks before, "this objection
to talking shop.  For what reason under the sun do men and women come
together if not for the exchange of the best that is in them?  And the
best that is in them is what they are interested in, the thing by which
they make their living, the thing they've specialized on and sat up days
and nights over, and even dreamed about.  Imagine Mr. Butler living up to
social etiquette and enunciating his views on Paul Verlaine or the German
drama or the novels of D'Annunzio.  We'd be bored to death.  I, for one,
if I must listen to Mr. Butler, prefer to hear him talk about his law.
It's the best that is in him, and life is so short that I want the best
of every man and woman I meet."

"But," Ruth had objected, "there are the topics of general interest to
all."

"There, you mistake," he had rushed on.  "All persons in society, all
cliques in society--or, rather, nearly all persons and cliques--ape their
betters.  Now, who are the best betters?  The idlers, the wealthy idlers.
They do not know, as a rule, the things known by the persons who are
doing something in the world.  To listen to conversation about such
things would mean to be bored, wherefore the idlers decree that such
things are shop and must not be talked about.  Likewise they decree the
things that are not shop and which may be talked about, and those things
are the latest operas, latest novels, cards, billiards, cocktails,
automobiles, horse shows, trout fishing, tuna-fishing, big-game shooting,
yacht sailing, and so forth--and mark you, these are the things the
idlers know.  In all truth, they constitute the shop-talk of the idlers.
And the funniest part of it is that many of the clever people, and all
the would-be clever people, allow the idlers so to impose upon them.  As
for me, I want the best a man's got in him, call it shop vulgarity or
anything you please."

And Ruth had not understood.  This attack of his on the established had
seemed to her just so much wilfulness of opinion.

So Martin contaminated Professor Caldwell with his own earnestness,
challenging him to speak his mind.  As Ruth paused beside them she heard
Martin saying:-

"You surely don't pronounce such heresies in the University of
California?"

Professor Caldwell shrugged his shoulders.  "The honest taxpayer and the
politician, you know.  Sacramento gives us our appropriations and
therefore we kowtow to Sacramento, and to the Board of Regents, and to
the party press, or to the press of both parties."

"Yes, that's clear; but how about you?" Martin urged.  "You must be a
fish out of the water."

"Few like me, I imagine, in the university pond.  Sometimes I am fairly
sure I am out of water, and that I should belong in Paris, in Grub
Street, in a hermit's cave, or in some sadly wild Bohemian crowd,
drinking claret,--dago-red they call it in San Francisco,--dining in
cheap restaurants in the Latin Quarter, and expressing vociferously
radical views upon all creation.  Really, I am frequently almost sure
that I was cut out to be a radical.  But then, there are so many
questions on which I am not sure.  I grow timid when I am face to face
with my human frailty, which ever prevents me from grasping all the
factors in any problem--human, vital problems, you know."

And as he talked on, Martin became aware that to his own lips had come
the "Song of the Trade Wind":-

   "I am strongest at noon,
   But under the moon
   I stiffen the bunt of the sail."

He was almost humming the words, and it dawned upon him that the other
reminded him of the trade wind, of the Northeast Trade, steady, and cool,
and strong.  He was equable, he was to be relied upon, and withal there
was a certain bafflement about him.  Martin had the feeling that he never
spoke his full mind, just as he had often had the feeling that the trades
never blew their strongest but always held reserves of strength that were
never used.  Martin's trick of visioning was active as ever.  His brain
was a most accessible storehouse of remembered fact and fancy, and its
contents seemed ever ordered and spread for his inspection.  Whatever
occurred in the instant present, Martin's mind immediately presented
associated antithesis or similitude which ordinarily expressed themselves
to him in vision.  It was sheerly automatic, and his visioning was an
unfailing accompaniment to the living present.  Just as Ruth's face, in a
momentary jealousy had called before his eyes a forgotten moonlight gale,
and as Professor Caldwell made him see again the Northeast Trade herding
the white billows across the purple sea, so, from moment to moment, not
disconcerting but rather identifying and classifying, new memory-visions
rose before him, or spread under his eyelids, or were thrown upon the
screen of his consciousness.  These visions came out of the actions and
sensations of the past, out of things and events and books of yesterday
and last week--a countless host of apparitions that, waking or sleeping,
forever thronged his mind.

So it was, as he listened to Professor Caldwell's easy flow of speech--the
conversation of a clever, cultured man--that Martin kept seeing himself
down all his past.  He saw himself when he had been quite the hoodlum,
wearing a "stiff-rim" Stetson hat and a square-cut, double-breasted coat,
with a certain swagger to the shoulders and possessing the ideal of being
as tough as the police permitted.  He did not disguise it to himself, nor
attempt to palliate it.  At one time in his life he had been just a
common hoodlum, the leader of a gang that worried the police and
terrorized honest, working-class householders.  But his ideals had
changed.  He glanced about him at the well-bred, well-dressed men and
women, and breathed into his lungs the atmosphere of culture and
refinement, and at the same moment the ghost of his early youth, in stiff-
rim and square-cut, with swagger and toughness, stalked across the room.
This figure, of the corner hoodlum, he saw merge into himself, sitting
and talking with an actual university professor.

For, after all, he had never found his permanent abiding place.  He had
fitted in wherever he found himself, been a favorite always and
everywhere by virtue of holding his own at work and at play and by his
willingness and ability to fight for his rights and command respect.  But
he had never taken root.  He had fitted in sufficiently to satisfy his
fellows but not to satisfy himself.  He had been perturbed always by a
feeling of unrest, had heard always the call of something from beyond,
and had wandered on through life seeking it until he found books and art
and love.  And here he was, in the midst of all this, the only one of all
the comrades he had adventured with who could have made themselves
eligible for the inside of the Morse home.

But such thoughts and visions did not prevent him from following
Professor Caldwell closely.  And as he followed, comprehendingly and
critically, he noted the unbroken field of the other's knowledge.  As for
himself, from moment to moment the conversation showed him gaps and open
stretches, whole subjects with which he was unfamiliar.  Nevertheless,
thanks to his Spencer, he saw that he possessed the outlines of the field
of knowledge.  It was a matter only of time, when he would fill in the
outline.  Then watch out, he thought--'ware shoal, everybody!  He felt
like sitting at the feet of the professor, worshipful and absorbent; but,
as he listened, he began to discern a weakness in the other's judgments--a
weakness so stray and elusive that he might not have caught it had it not
been ever present.  And when he did catch it, he leapt to equality at
once.

Ruth came up to them a second time, just as Martin began to speak.

"I'll tell you where you are wrong, or, rather, what weakens your
judgments," he said.  "You lack biology.  It has no place in your scheme
of things.--Oh, I mean the real interpretative biology, from the ground
up, from the laboratory and the test-tube and the vitalized inorganic
right on up to the widest aesthetic and sociological generalizations."

Ruth was appalled.  She had sat two lecture courses under Professor
Caldwell and looked up to him as the living repository of all knowledge.

"I scarcely follow you," he said dubiously.

Martin was not so sure but what he had followed him.

"Then I'll try to explain," he said.  "I remember reading in Egyptian
history something to the effect that understanding could not be had of
Egyptian art without first studying the land question."

"Quite right," the professor nodded.

"And it seems to me," Martin continued, "that knowledge of the land
question, in turn, of all questions, for that matter, cannot be had
without previous knowledge of the stuff and the constitution of life.  How
can we understand laws and institutions, religions and customs, without
understanding, not merely the nature of the creatures that made them, but
the nature of the stuff out of which the creatures are made?  Is
literature less human than the architecture and sculpture of Egypt?  Is
there one thing in the known universe that is not subject to the law of
evolution?--Oh, I know there is an elaborate evolution of the various
arts laid down, but it seems to me to be too mechanical.  The human
himself is left out.  The evolution of the tool, of the harp, of music
and song and dance, are all beautifully elaborated; but how about the
evolution of the human himself, the development of the basic and
intrinsic parts that were in him before he made his first tool or
gibbered his first chant?  It is that which you do not consider, and
which I call biology.  It is biology in its largest aspects.

"I know I express myself incoherently, but I've tried to hammer out the
idea.  It came to me as you were talking, so I was not primed and ready
to deliver it.  You spoke yourself of the human frailty that prevented
one from taking all the factors into consideration.  And you, in turn,--or
so it seems to me,--leave out the biological factor, the very stuff out
of which has been spun the fabric of all the arts, the warp and the woof
of all human actions and achievements."

To Ruth's amazement, Martin was not immediately crushed, and that the
professor replied in the way he did struck her as forbearance for
Martin's youth.  Professor Caldwell sat for a full minute, silent and
fingering his watch chain.

"Do you know," he said at last, "I've had that same criticism passed on
me once before--by a very great man, a scientist and evolutionist, Joseph
Le Conte.  But he is dead, and I thought to remain undetected; and now
you come along and expose me.  Seriously, though--and this is
confession--I think there is something in your contention--a great deal,
in fact.  I am too classical, not enough up-to-date in the interpretative
branches of science, and I can only plead the disadvantages of my
education and a temperamental slothfulness that prevents me from doing
the work.  I wonder if you'll believe that I've never been inside a
physics or chemistry laboratory?  It is true, nevertheless.  Le Conte was
right, and so are you, Mr. Eden, at least to an extent--how much I do not
know."

Ruth drew Martin away with her on a pretext; when she had got him aside,
whispering:-

"You shouldn't have monopolized Professor Caldwell that way.  There may
be others who want to talk with him."

"My mistake," Martin admitted contritely.  "But I'd got him stirred up,
and he was so interesting that I did not think.  Do you know, he is the
brightest, the most intellectual, man I have ever talked with.  And I'll
tell you something else.  I once thought that everybody who went to
universities, or who sat in the high places in society, was just as
brilliant and intelligent as he."

"He's an exception," she answered.

"I should say so.  Whom do you want me to talk to now?--Oh, say, bring me
up against that cashier-fellow."

Martin talked for fifteen minutes with him, nor could Ruth have wished
better behavior on her lover's part.  Not once did his eyes flash nor his
cheeks flush, while the calmness and poise with which he talked surprised
her.  But in Martin's estimation the whole tribe of bank cashiers fell a
few hundred per cent, and for the rest of the evening he labored under
the impression that bank cashiers and talkers of platitudes were
synonymous phrases.  The army officer he found good-natured and simple, a
healthy, wholesome young fellow, content to occupy the place in life into
which birth and luck had flung him.  On learning that he had completed
two years in the university, Martin was puzzled to know where he had
stored it away.  Nevertheless Martin liked him better than the
platitudinous bank cashier.

"I really don't object to platitudes," he told Ruth later; "but what
worries me into nervousness is the pompous, smugly complacent, superior
certitude with which they are uttered and the time taken to do it.  Why,
I could give that man the whole history of the Reformation in the time he
took to tell me that the Union-Labor Party had fused with the Democrats.
Do you know, he skins his words as a professional poker-player skins the
cards that are dealt out to him.  Some day I'll show you what I mean."

"I'm sorry you don't like him," was her reply.  "He's a favorite of Mr.
Butler's.  Mr. Butler says he is safe and honest--calls him the Rock,
Peter, and says that upon him any banking institution can well be built."

"I don't doubt it--from the little I saw of him and the less I heard from
him; but I don't think so much of banks as I did.  You don't mind my
speaking my mind this way, dear?"

"No, no; it is most interesting."

"Yes," Martin went on heartily, "I'm no more than a barbarian getting my
first impressions of civilization.  Such impressions must be
entertainingly novel to the civilized person."

"What did you think of my cousins?" Ruth queried.

"I liked them better than the other women.  There's plenty of fun in them
along with paucity of pretence."

"Then you did like the other women?"

He shook his head.

"That social-settlement woman is no more than a sociological poll-parrot.
I swear, if you winnowed her out between the stars, like Tomlinson, there
would be found in her not one original thought.  As for the
portrait-painter, she was a positive bore.  She'd make a good wife for
the cashier.  And the musician woman!  I don't care how nimble her
fingers are, how perfect her technique, how wonderful her expression--the
fact is, she knows nothing about music."

"She plays beautifully," Ruth protested.

"Yes, she's undoubtedly gymnastic in the externals of music, but the
intrinsic spirit of music is unguessed by her.  I asked her what music
meant to her--you know I'm always curious to know that particular thing;
and she did not know what it meant to her, except that she adored it,
that it was the greatest of the arts, and that it meant more than life to
her."

"You were making them talk shop," Ruth charged him.

"I confess it.  And if they were failures on shop, imagine my sufferings
if they had discoursed on other subjects.  Why, I used to think that up
here, where all the advantages of culture were enjoyed--"  He paused for
a moment, and watched the youthful shade of himself, in stiff-rim and
square-cut, enter the door and swagger across the room.  "As I was
saying, up here I thought all men and women were brilliant and radiant.
But now, from what little I've seen of them, they strike me as a pack of
ninnies, most of them, and ninety percent of the remainder as bores.  Now
there's Professor Caldwell--he's different.  He's a man, every inch of
him and every atom of his gray matter."

Ruth's face brightened.

"Tell me about him," she urged.  "Not what is large and brilliant--I know
those qualities; but whatever you feel is adverse.  I am most curious to
know."

"Perhaps I'll get myself in a pickle."  Martin debated humorously for a
moment.  "Suppose you tell me first.  Or maybe you find in him nothing
less than the best."

"I attended two lecture courses under him, and I have known him for two
years; that is why I am anxious for your first impression."

"Bad impression, you mean?  Well, here goes.  He is all the fine things
you think about him, I guess.  At least, he is the finest specimen of
intellectual man I have met; but he is a man with a secret shame."

"Oh, no, no!" he hastened to cry.  "Nothing paltry nor vulgar.  What I
mean is that he strikes me as a man who has gone to the bottom of things,
and is so afraid of what he saw that he makes believe to himself that he
never saw it.  Perhaps that's not the clearest way to express it.  Here's
another way.  A man who has found the path to the hidden temple but has
not followed it; who has, perhaps, caught glimpses of the temple and
striven afterward to convince himself that it was only a mirage of
foliage.  Yet another way.  A man who could have done things but who
placed no value on the doing, and who, all the time, in his innermost
heart, is regretting that he has not done them; who has secretly laughed
at the rewards for doing, and yet, still more secretly, has yearned for
the rewards and for the joy of doing."

"I don't read him that way," she said.  "And for that matter, I don't see
just what you mean."

"It is only a vague feeling on my part," Martin temporized.  "I have no
reason for it.  It is only a feeling, and most likely it is wrong.  You
certainly should know him better than I."

From the evening at Ruth's Martin brought away with him strange
confusions and conflicting feelings.  He was disappointed in his goal, in
the persons he had climbed to be with.  On the other hand, he was
encouraged with his success.  The climb had been easier than he expected.
He was superior to the climb, and (he did not, with false modesty, hide
it from himself) he was superior to the beings among whom he had
climbed--with the exception, of course, of Professor Caldwell.  About
life and the books he knew more than they, and he wondered into what
nooks and crannies they had cast aside their educations.  He did not know
that he was himself possessed of unusual brain vigor; nor did he know
that the persons who were given to probing the depths and to thinking
ultimate thoughts were not to be found in the drawing rooms of the
world's Morses; nor did he dream that such persons were as lonely eagles
sailing solitary in the azure sky far above the earth and its swarming
freight of gregarious life.


