

CHAPTER XXVIII


But success had lost Martin's address, and her messengers no longer came
to his door.  For twenty-five days, working Sundays and holidays, he
toiled on "The Shame of the Sun," a long essay of some thirty thousand
words.  It was a deliberate attack on the mysticism of the Maeterlinck
school--an attack from the citadel of positive science upon the wonder-
dreamers, but an attack nevertheless that retained much of beauty and
wonder of the sort compatible with ascertained fact.  It was a little
later that he followed up the attack with two short essays, "The Wonder-
Dreamers" and "The Yardstick of the Ego."  And on essays, long and short,
he began to pay the travelling expenses from magazine to magazine.

During the twenty-five days spent on "The Shame of the Sun," he sold hack-
work to the extent of six dollars and fifty cents.  A joke had brought in
fifty cents, and a second one, sold to a high-grade comic weekly, had
fetched a dollar.  Then two humorous poems had earned two dollars and
three dollars respectively.  As a result, having exhausted his credit
with the tradesmen (though he had increased his credit with the grocer to
five dollars), his wheel and suit of clothes went back to the pawnbroker.
The type-writer people were again clamoring for money, insistently
pointing out that according to the agreement rent was to be paid strictly
in advance.

Encouraged by his several small sales, Martin went back to hack-work.
Perhaps there was a living in it, after all.  Stored away under his table
were the twenty storiettes which had been rejected by the newspaper short-
story syndicate.  He read them over in order to find out how not to write
newspaper storiettes, and so doing, reasoned out the perfect formula.  He
found that the newspaper storiette should never be tragic, should never
end unhappily, and should never contain beauty of language, subtlety of
thought, nor real delicacy of sentiment.  Sentiment it must contain,
plenty of it, pure and noble, of the sort that in his own early youth had
brought his applause from "nigger heaven"--the "For-God-my-country-and-
the-Czar" and "I-may-be-poor-but-I-am-honest" brand of sentiment.

Having learned such precautions, Martin consulted "The Duchess" for tone,
and proceeded to mix according to formula.  The formula consists of three
parts: (1) a pair of lovers are jarred apart; (2) by some deed or event
they are reunited; (3) marriage bells.  The third part was an unvarying
quantity, but the first and second parts could be varied an infinite
number of times.  Thus, the pair of lovers could be jarred apart by
misunderstood motives, by accident of fate, by jealous rivals, by irate
parents, by crafty guardians, by scheming relatives, and so forth and so
forth; they could be reunited by a brave deed of the man lover, by a
similar deed of the woman lover, by change of heart in one lover or the
other, by forced confession of crafty guardian, scheming relative, or
jealous rival, by voluntary confession of same, by discovery of some
unguessed secret, by lover storming girl's heart, by lover making long
and noble self-sacrifice, and so on, endlessly.  It was very fetching to
make the girl propose in the course of being reunited, and Martin
discovered, bit by bit, other decidedly piquant and fetching ruses.  But
marriage bells at the end was the one thing he could take no liberties
with; though the heavens rolled up as a scroll and the stars fell, the
wedding bells must go on ringing just the same.  In quantity, the formula
prescribed twelve hundred words minimum dose, fifteen hundred words
maximum dose.

Before he got very far along in the art of the storiette, Martin worked
out half a dozen stock forms, which he always consulted when constructing
storiettes.  These forms were like the cunning tables used by
mathematicians, which may be entered from top, bottom, right, and left,
which entrances consist of scores of lines and dozens of columns, and
from which may be drawn, without reasoning or thinking, thousands of
different conclusions, all unchallengably precise and true.  Thus, in the
course of half an hour with his forms, Martin could frame up a dozen or
so storiettes, which he put aside and filled in at his convenience.  He
found that he could fill one in, after a day of serious work, in the hour
before going to bed.  As he later confessed to Ruth, he could almost do
it in his sleep.  The real work was in constructing the frames, and that
was merely mechanical.

He had no doubt whatever of the efficacy of his formula, and for once he
knew the editorial mind when he said positively to himself that the first
two he sent off would bring checks.  And checks they brought, for four
dollars each, at the end of twelve days.

In the meantime he was making fresh and alarming discoveries concerning
the magazines.  Though the Transcontinental had published "The Ring of
Bells," no check was forthcoming.  Martin needed it, and he wrote for it.
An evasive answer and a request for more of his work was all he received.
He had gone hungry two days waiting for the reply, and it was then that
he put his wheel back in pawn.  He wrote regularly, twice a week, to the
Transcontinental for his five dollars, though it was only
semi-occasionally that he elicited a reply.  He did not know that the
Transcontinental had been staggering along precariously for years, that
it was a fourth-rater, or tenth-rater, without standing, with a crazy
circulation that partly rested on petty bullying and partly on patriotic
appealing, and with advertisements that were scarcely more than
charitable donations.  Nor did he know that the Transcontinental was the
sole livelihood of the editor and the business manager, and that they
could wring their livelihood out of it only by moving to escape paying
rent and by never paying any bill they could evade.  Nor could he have
guessed that the particular five dollars that belonged to him had been
appropriated by the business manager for the painting of his house in
Alameda, which painting he performed himself, on week-day afternoons,
because he could not afford to pay union wages and because the first scab
he had employed had had a ladder jerked out from under him and been sent
to the hospital with a broken collar-bone.

The ten dollars for which Martin had sold "Treasure Hunters" to the
Chicago newspaper did not come to hand.  The article had been published,
as he had ascertained at the file in the Central Reading-room, but no
word could he get from the editor.  His letters were ignored.  To satisfy
himself that they had been received, he registered several of them.  It
was nothing less than robbery, he concluded--a cold-blooded steal; while
he starved, he was pilfered of his merchandise, of his goods, the sale of
which was the sole way of getting bread to eat.

Youth and Age was a weekly, and it had published two-thirds of his twenty-
one-thousand-word serial when it went out of business.  With it went all
hopes of getting his sixteen dollars.

To cap the situation, "The Pot," which he looked upon as one of the best
things he had written, was lost to him.  In despair, casting about
frantically among the magazines, he had sent it to The Billow, a society
weekly in San Francisco.  His chief reason for submitting it to that
publication was that, having only to travel across the bay from Oakland,
a quick decision could be reached.  Two weeks later he was overjoyed to
see, in the latest number on the news-stand, his story printed in full,
illustrated, and in the place of honor.  He went home with leaping pulse,
wondering how much they would pay him for one of the best things he had
done.  Also, the celerity with which it had been accepted and published
was a pleasant thought to him.  That the editor had not informed him of
the acceptance made the surprise more complete.  After waiting a week,
two weeks, and half a week longer, desperation conquered diffidence, and
he wrote to the editor of The Billow, suggesting that possibly through
some negligence of the business manager his little account had been
overlooked.

Even if it isn't more than five dollars, Martin thought to himself, it
will buy enough beans and pea-soup to enable me to write half a dozen
like it, and possibly as good.

Back came a cool letter from the editor that at least elicited Martin's
admiration.

"We thank you," it ran, "for your excellent contribution.  All of us in
the office enjoyed it immensely, and, as you see, it was given the place
of honor and immediate publication.  We earnestly hope that you liked the
illustrations.

"On rereading your letter it seems to us that you are laboring under the
misapprehension that we pay for unsolicited manuscripts.  This is not our
custom, and of course yours was unsolicited.  We assumed, naturally, when
we received your story, that you understood the situation.  We can only
deeply regret this unfortunate misunderstanding, and assure you of our
unfailing regard.  Again, thanking you for your kind contribution, and
hoping to receive more from you in the near future, we remain, etc."

There was also a postscript to the effect that though The Billow carried
no free-list, it took great pleasure in sending him a complimentary
subscription for the ensuing year.

After that experience, Martin typed at the top of the first sheet of all
his manuscripts: "Submitted at your usual rate."

Some day, he consoled himself, they will be submitted at _my_ usual rate.

He discovered in himself, at this period, a passion for perfection, under
the sway of which he rewrote and polished "The Jostling Street," "The
Wine of Life," "Joy," the "Sea Lyrics," and others of his earlier work.
As of old, nineteen hours of labor a day was all too little to suit him.
He wrote prodigiously, and he read prodigiously, forgetting in his toil
the pangs caused by giving up his tobacco.  Ruth's promised cure for the
habit, flamboyantly labelled, he stowed away in the most inaccessible
corner of his bureau.  Especially during his stretches of famine he
suffered from lack of the weed; but no matter how often he mastered the
craving, it remained with him as strong as ever.  He regarded it as the
biggest thing he had ever achieved.  Ruth's point of view was that he was
doing no more than was right.  She brought him the anti-tobacco remedy,
purchased out of her glove money, and in a few days forgot all about it.

His machine-made storiettes, though he hated them and derided them, were
successful.  By means of them he redeemed all his pledges, paid most of
his bills, and bought a new set of tires for his wheel.  The storiettes
at least kept the pot a-boiling and gave him time for ambitious work;
while the one thing that upheld him was the forty dollars he had received
from The White Mouse.  He anchored his faith to that, and was confident
that the really first-class magazines would pay an unknown writer at
least an equal rate, if not a better one.  But the thing was, how to get
into the first-class magazines.  His best stories, essays, and poems went
begging among them, and yet, each month, he read reams of dull, prosy,
inartistic stuff between all their various covers.  If only one editor,
he sometimes thought, would descend from his high seat of pride to write
me one cheering line!  No matter if my work is unusual, no matter if it
is unfit, for prudential reasons, for their pages, surely there must be
some sparks in it, somewhere, a few, to warm them to some sort of
appreciation.  And thereupon he would get out one or another of his
manuscripts, such as "Adventure," and read it over and over in a vain
attempt to vindicate the editorial silence.

As the sweet California spring came on, his period of plenty came to an
end.  For several weeks he had been worried by a strange silence on the
part of the newspaper storiette syndicate.  Then, one day, came back to
him through the mail ten of his immaculate machine-made storiettes.  They
were accompanied by a brief letter to the effect that the syndicate was
overstocked, and that some months would elapse before it would be in the
market again for manuscripts.  Martin had even been extravagant on the
strength of those ten storiettes.  Toward the last the syndicate had
been paying him five dollars each for them and accepting every one he
sent.  So he had looked upon the ten as good as sold, and he had lived
accordingly, on a basis of fifty dollars in the bank.  So it was that he
entered abruptly upon a lean period, wherein he continued selling his
earlier efforts to publications that would not pay and submitting his
later work to magazines that would not buy.  Also, he resumed his trips
to the pawn-broker down in Oakland.  A few jokes and snatches of humorous
verse, sold to the New York weeklies, made existence barely possible for
him.  It was at this time that he wrote letters of inquiry to the several
great monthly and quarterly reviews, and learned in reply that they
rarely considered unsolicited articles, and that most of their contents
were written upon order by well-known specialists who were authorities in
their various fields.


