

CHAPTER XXIX


It was a hard summer for Martin.  Manuscript readers and editors were
away on vacation, and publications that ordinarily returned a decision in
three weeks now retained his manuscript for three months or more.  The
consolation he drew from it was that a saving in postage was effected by
the deadlock.  Only the robber-publications seemed to remain actively in
business, and to them Martin disposed of all his early efforts, such as
"Pearl-diving," "The Sea as a Career," "Turtle-catching," and "The
Northeast Trades."  For these manuscripts he never received a penny.  It
is true, after six months' correspondence, he effected a compromise,
whereby he received a safety razor for "Turtle-catching," and that The
Acropolis, having agreed to give him five dollars cash and five yearly
subscriptions: for "The Northeast Trades," fulfilled the second part of
the agreement.

For a sonnet on Stevenson he managed to wring two dollars out of a Boston
editor who was running a magazine with a Matthew Arnold taste and a penny-
dreadful purse.  "The Peri and the Pearl," a clever skit of a poem of two
hundred lines, just finished, white hot from his brain, won the heart of
the editor of a San Francisco magazine published in the interest of a
great railroad.  When the editor wrote, offering him payment in
transportation, Martin wrote back to inquire if the transportation was
transferable.  It was not, and so, being prevented from peddling it, he
asked for the return of the poem.  Back it came, with the editor's
regrets, and Martin sent it to San Francisco again, this time to The
Hornet, a pretentious monthly that had been fanned into a constellation
of the first magnitude by the brilliant journalist who founded it.  But
The Hornet's light had begun to dim long before Martin was born.  The
editor promised Martin fifteen dollars for the poem, but, when it was
published, seemed to forget about it.  Several of his letters being
ignored, Martin indicted an angry one which drew a reply.  It was written
by a new editor, who coolly informed Martin that he declined to be held
responsible for the old editor's mistakes, and that he did not think much
of "The Peri and the Pearl" anyway.

But The Globe, a Chicago magazine, gave Martin the most cruel treatment
of all.  He had refrained from offering his "Sea Lyrics" for publication,
until driven to it by starvation.  After having been rejected by a dozen
magazines, they had come to rest in The Globe office.  There were thirty
poems in the collection, and he was to receive a dollar apiece for them.
The first month four were published, and he promptly received a cheek for
four dollars; but when he looked over the magazine, he was appalled at
the slaughter.  In some cases the titles had been altered: "Finis," for
instance, being changed to "The Finish," and "The Song of the Outer Reef"
to "The Song of the Coral Reef."  In one case, an absolutely different
title, a misappropriate title, was substituted.  In place of his own,
"Medusa Lights," the editor had printed, "The Backward Track."  But the
slaughter in the body of the poems was terrifying.  Martin groaned and
sweated and thrust his hands through his hair.  Phrases, lines, and
stanzas were cut out, interchanged, or juggled about in the most
incomprehensible manner.  Sometimes lines and stanzas not his own were
substituted for his.  He could not believe that a sane editor could be
guilty of such maltreatment, and his favorite hypothesis was that his
poems must have been doctored by the office boy or the stenographer.
Martin wrote immediately, begging the editor to cease publishing the
lyrics and to return them to him.

He wrote again and again, begging, entreating, threatening, but his
letters were ignored.  Month by month the slaughter went on till the
thirty poems were published, and month by month he received a check for
those which had appeared in the current number.

Despite these various misadventures, the memory of the White Mouse forty-
dollar check sustained him, though he was driven more and more to hack-
work.  He discovered a bread-and-butter field in the agricultural
weeklies and trade journals, though among the religious weeklies he found
he could easily starve.  At his lowest ebb, when his black suit was in
pawn, he made a ten-strike--or so it seemed to him--in a prize contest
arranged by the County Committee of the Republican Party.  There were
three branches of the contest, and he entered them all, laughing at
himself bitterly the while in that he was driven to such straits to live.
His poem won the first prize of ten dollars, his campaign song the second
prize of five dollars, his essay on the principles of the Republican
Party the first prize of twenty-five dollars.  Which was very gratifying
to him until he tried to collect.  Something had gone wrong in the County
Committee, and, though a rich banker and a state senator were members of
it, the money was not forthcoming.  While this affair was hanging fire,
he proved that he understood the principles of the Democratic Party by
winning the first prize for his essay in a similar contest.  And,
moreover, he received the money, twenty-five dollars.  But the forty
dollars won in the first contest he never received.

Driven to shifts in order to see Ruth, and deciding that the long walk
from north Oakland to her house and back again consumed too much time, he
kept his black suit in pawn in place of his bicycle.  The latter gave him
exercise, saved him hours of time for work, and enabled him to see Ruth
just the same.  A pair of knee duck trousers and an old sweater made him
a presentable wheel costume, so that he could go with Ruth on afternoon
rides.  Besides, he no longer had opportunity to see much of her in her
own home, where Mrs. Morse was thoroughly prosecuting her campaign of
entertainment.  The exalted beings he met there, and to whom he had
looked up but a short time before, now bored him.  They were no longer
exalted.  He was nervous and irritable, what of his hard times,
disappointments, and close application to work, and the conversation of
such people was maddening.  He was not unduly egotistic.  He measured the
narrowness of their minds by the minds of the thinkers in the books he
read.  At Ruth's home he never met a large mind, with the exception of
Professor Caldwell, and Caldwell he had met there only once.  As for the
rest, they were numskulls, ninnies, superficial, dogmatic, and ignorant.
It was their ignorance that astounded him.  What was the matter with
them?  What had they done with their educations?  They had had access to
the same books he had.  How did it happen that they had drawn nothing
from them?

He knew that the great minds, the deep and rational thinkers, existed.  He
had his proofs from the books, the books that had educated him beyond the
Morse standard.  And he knew that higher intellects than those of the
Morse circle were to be found in the world.  He read English society
novels, wherein he caught glimpses of men and women talking politics and
philosophy.  And he read of salons in great cities, even in the United
States, where art and intellect congregated.  Foolishly, in the past, he
had conceived that all well-groomed persons above the working class were
persons with power of intellect and vigor of beauty.  Culture and collars
had gone together, to him, and he had been deceived into believing that
college educations and mastery were the same things.

Well, he would fight his way on and up higher.  And he would take Ruth
with him.  Her he dearly loved, and he was confident that she would shine
anywhere.  As it was clear to him that he had been handicapped by his
early environment, so now he perceived that she was similarly
handicapped.  She had not had a chance to expand.  The books on her
father's shelves, the paintings on the walls, the music on the piano--all
was just so much meretricious display.  To real literature, real
painting, real music, the Morses and their kind, were dead.  And bigger
than such things was life, of which they were densely, hopelessly
ignorant.  In spite of their Unitarian proclivities and their masks of
conservative broadmindedness, they were two generations behind
interpretative science: their mental processes were mediaeval, while
their thinking on the ultimate data of existence and of the universe
struck him as the same metaphysical method that was as young as the
youngest race, as old as the cave-man, and older--the same that moved the
first Pleistocene ape-man to fear the dark; that moved the first hasty
Hebrew savage to incarnate Eve from Adam's rib; that moved Descartes to
build an idealistic system of the universe out of the projections of his
own puny ego; and that moved the famous British ecclesiastic to denounce
evolution in satire so scathing as to win immediate applause and leave
his name a notorious scrawl on the page of history.

So Martin thought, and he thought further, till it dawned upon him that
the difference between these lawyers, officers, business men, and bank
cashiers he had met and the members of the working class he had known was
on a par with the difference in the food they ate, clothes they wore,
neighborhoods in which they lived.  Certainly, in all of them was lacking
the something more which he found in himself and in the books.  The
Morses had shown him the best their social position could produce, and he
was not impressed by it.  A pauper himself, a slave to the money-lender,
he knew himself the superior of those he met at the Morses'; and, when
his one decent suit of clothes was out of pawn, he moved among them a
lord of life, quivering with a sense of outrage akin to what a prince
would suffer if condemned to live with goat-herds.

"You hate and fear the socialists," he remarked to Mr. Morse, one evening
at dinner; "but why?  You know neither them nor their doctrines."

The conversation had been swung in that direction by Mrs. Morse, who had
been invidiously singing the praises of Mr. Hapgood.  The cashier was
Martin's black beast, and his temper was a trifle short where the talker
of platitudes was concerned.

"Yes," he had said, "Charley Hapgood is what they call a rising young
man--somebody told me as much.  And it is true.  He'll make the
Governor's Chair before he dies, and, who knows? maybe the United States
Senate."

"What makes you think so?" Mrs. Morse had inquired.

"I've heard him make a campaign speech.  It was so cleverly stupid and
unoriginal, and also so convincing, that the leaders cannot help but
regard him as safe and sure, while his platitudes are so much like the
platitudes of the average voter that--oh, well, you know you flatter any
man by dressing up his own thoughts for him and presenting them to him."

"I actually think you are jealous of Mr. Hapgood," Ruth had chimed in.

"Heaven forbid!"

The look of horror on Martin's face stirred Mrs. Morse to belligerence.

"You surely don't mean to say that Mr. Hapgood is stupid?" she demanded
icily.

"No more than the average Republican," was the retort, "or average
Democrat, either.  They are all stupid when they are not crafty, and very
few of them are crafty.  The only wise Republicans are the millionnaires
and their conscious henchmen.  They know which side their bread is
buttered on, and they know why."

"I am a Republican," Mr. Morse put in lightly.  "Pray, how do you
classify me?"

"Oh, you are an unconscious henchman."

"Henchman?"

"Why, yes.  You do corporation work.  You have no working-class nor
criminal practice.  You don't depend upon wife-beaters and pickpockets
for your income.  You get your livelihood from the masters of society,
and whoever feeds a man is that man's master.  Yes, you are a henchman.
You are interested in advancing the interests of the aggregations of
capital you serve."

Mr. Morse's face was a trifle red.

"I confess, sir," he said, "that you talk like a scoundrelly socialist."

Then it was that Martin made his remark:

"You hate and fear the socialists; but why?  You know neither them nor
their doctrines."

"Your doctrine certainly sounds like socialism," Mr. Morse replied, while
Ruth gazed anxiously from one to the other, and Mrs. Morse beamed happily
at the opportunity afforded of rousing her liege lord's antagonism.

"Because I say Republicans are stupid, and hold that liberty, equality,
and fraternity are exploded bubbles, does not make me a socialist,"
Martin said with a smile.  "Because I question Jefferson and the
unscientific Frenchmen who informed his mind, does not make me a
socialist.  Believe me, Mr. Morse, you are far nearer socialism than I
who am its avowed enemy."

"Now you please to be facetious," was all the other could say.

"Not at all.  I speak in all seriousness.  You still believe in equality,
and yet you do the work of the corporations, and the corporations, from
day to day, are busily engaged in burying equality.  And you call me a
socialist because I deny equality, because I affirm just what you live up
to.  The Republicans are foes to equality, though most of them fight the
battle against equality with the very word itself the slogan on their
lips.  In the name of equality they destroy equality.  That was why I
called them stupid.  As for myself, I am an individualist.  I believe the
race is to the swift, the battle to the strong.  Such is the lesson I
have learned from biology, or at least think I have learned.  As I said,
I am an individualist, and individualism is the hereditary and eternal
foe of socialism."

"But you frequent socialist meetings," Mr. Morse challenged.

"Certainly, just as spies frequent hostile camps.  How else are you to
learn about the enemy?  Besides, I enjoy myself at their meetings.  They
are good fighters, and, right or wrong, they have read the books.  Any
one of them knows far more about sociology and all the other ologies than
the average captain of industry.  Yes, I have been to half a dozen of
their meetings, but that doesn't make me a socialist any more than
hearing Charley Hapgood orate made me a Republican."

"I can't help it," Mr. Morse said feebly, "but I still believe you
incline that way."

Bless me, Martin thought to himself, he doesn't know what I was talking
about.  He hasn't understood a word of it.  What did he do with his
education, anyway?

Thus, in his development, Martin found himself face to face with economic
morality, or the morality of class; and soon it became to him a grisly
monster.  Personally, he was an intellectual moralist, and more offending
to him than platitudinous pomposity was the morality of those about him,
which was a curious hotchpotch of the economic, the metaphysical, the
sentimental, and the imitative.

A sample of this curious messy mixture he encountered nearer home.  His
sister Marian had been keeping company with an industrious young
mechanic, of German extraction, who, after thoroughly learning the trade,
had set up for himself in a bicycle-repair shop.  Also, having got the
agency for a low-grade make of wheel, he was prosperous.  Marian had
called on Martin in his room a short time before to announce her
engagement, during which visit she had playfully inspected Martin's palm
and told his fortune.  On her next visit she brought Hermann von Schmidt
along with her.  Martin did the honors and congratulated both of them in
language so easy and graceful as to affect disagreeably the peasant-mind
of his sister's lover.  This bad impression was further heightened by
Martin's reading aloud the half-dozen stanzas of verse with which he had
commemorated Marian's previous visit.  It was a bit of society verse,
airy and delicate, which he had named "The Palmist."  He was surprised,
when he finished reading it, to note no enjoyment in his sister's face.
Instead, her eyes were fixed anxiously upon her betrothed, and Martin,
following her gaze, saw spread on that worthy's asymmetrical features
nothing but black and sullen disapproval.  The incident passed over, they
made an early departure, and Martin forgot all about it, though for the
moment he had been puzzled that any woman, even of the working class,
should not have been flattered and delighted by having poetry written
about her.

Several evenings later Marian again visited him, this time alone.  Nor
did she waste time in coming to the point, upbraiding him sorrowfully for
what he had done.

"Why, Marian," he chided, "you talk as though you were ashamed of your
relatives, or of your brother at any rate."

"And I am, too," she blurted out.

Martin was bewildered by the tears of mortification he saw in her eyes.
The mood, whatever it was, was genuine.

"But, Marian, why should your Hermann be jealous of my writing poetry
about my own sister?"

"He ain't jealous," she sobbed.  "He says it was indecent, ob--obscene."

Martin emitted a long, low whistle of incredulity, then proceeded to
resurrect and read a carbon copy of "The Palmist."

"I can't see it," he said finally, proffering the manuscript to her.
"Read it yourself and show me whatever strikes you as obscene--that was
the word, wasn't it?"

"He says so, and he ought to know," was the answer, with a wave aside of
the manuscript, accompanied by a look of loathing.  "And he says you've
got to tear it up.  He says he won't have no wife of his with such things
written about her which anybody can read.  He says it's a disgrace, an'
he won't stand for it."

"Now, look here, Marian, this is nothing but nonsense," Martin began;
then abruptly changed his mind.

He saw before him an unhappy girl, knew the futility of attempting to
convince her husband or her, and, though the whole situation was absurd
and preposterous, he resolved to surrender.

"All right," he announced, tearing the manuscript into half a dozen
pieces and throwing it into the waste-basket.

He contented himself with the knowledge that even then the original type-
written manuscript was reposing in the office of a New York magazine.
Marian and her husband would never know, and neither himself nor they nor
the world would lose if the pretty, harmless poem ever were published.

Marian, starting to reach into the waste-basket, refrained.

"Can I?" she pleaded.

He nodded his head, regarding her thoughtfully as she gathered the torn
pieces of manuscript and tucked them into the pocket of her jacket--ocular
evidence of the success of her mission.  She reminded him of Lizzie
Connolly, though there was less of fire and gorgeous flaunting life in
her than in that other girl of the working class whom he had seen twice.
But they were on a par, the pair of them, in dress and carriage, and he
smiled with inward amusement at the caprice of his fancy which suggested
the appearance of either of them in Mrs. Morse's drawing-room.  The
amusement faded, and he was aware of a great loneliness.  This sister of
his and the Morse drawing-room were milestones of the road he had
travelled.  And he had left them behind.  He glanced affectionately about
him at his few books.  They were all the comrades left to him.

"Hello, what's that?" he demanded in startled surprise.

Marian repeated her question.

"Why don't I go to work?"  He broke into a laugh that was only
half-hearted.  "That Hermann of yours has been talking to you."

She shook her head.

"Don't lie," he commanded, and the nod of her head affirmed his charge.

"Well, you tell that Hermann of yours to mind his own business; that when
I write poetry about the girl he's keeping company with it's his
business, but that outside of that he's got no say so.  Understand?

"So you don't think I'll succeed as a writer, eh?" he went on.  "You
think I'm no good?--that I've fallen down and am a disgrace to the
family?"

"I think it would be much better if you got a job," she said firmly, and
he saw she was sincere.  "Hermann says--"

"Damn Hermann!" he broke out good-naturedly.  "What I want to know is
when you're going to get married.  Also, you find out from your Hermann
if he will deign to permit you to accept a wedding present from me."

He mused over the incident after she had gone, and once or twice broke
out into laughter that was bitter as he saw his sister and her betrothed,
all the members of his own class and the members of Ruth's class,
directing their narrow little lives by narrow little
formulas--herd-creatures, flocking together and patterning their lives by
one another's opinions, failing of being individuals and of really living
life because of the childlike formulas by which they were enslaved.  He
summoned them before him in apparitional procession: Bernard Higginbotham
arm in arm with Mr. Butler, Hermann von Schmidt cheek by jowl with
Charley Hapgood, and one by one and in pairs he judged them and dismissed
them--judged them by the standards of intellect and morality he had
learned from the books.  Vainly he asked: Where are the great souls, the
great men and women?  He found them not among the careless, gross, and
stupid intelligences that answered the call of vision to his narrow room.
He felt a loathing for them such as Circe must have felt for her swine.
When he had dismissed the last one and thought himself alone, a
late-comer entered, unexpected and unsummoned.  Martin watched him and
saw the stiff-rim, the square-cut, double-breasted coat and the
swaggering shoulders, of the youthful hoodlum who had once been he.

"You were like all the rest, young fellow," Martin sneered.  "Your
morality and your knowledge were just the same as theirs.  You did not
think and act for yourself.  Your opinions, like your clothes, were ready
made; your acts were shaped by popular approval.  You were cock of your
gang because others acclaimed you the real thing.  You fought and ruled
the gang, not because you liked to,--you know you really despised it,--but
because the other fellows patted you on the shoulder.  You licked Cheese-
Face because you wouldn't give in, and you wouldn't give in partly
because you were an abysmal brute and for the rest because you believed
what every one about you believed, that the measure of manhood was the
carnivorous ferocity displayed in injuring and marring fellow-creatures'
anatomies.  Why, you whelp, you even won other fellows' girls away from
them, not because you wanted the girls, but because in the marrow of
those about you, those who set your moral pace, was the instinct of the
wild stallion and the bull-seal.  Well, the years have passed, and what
do you think about it now?"

As if in reply, the vision underwent a swift metamorphosis.  The stiff-
rim and the square-cut vanished, being replaced by milder garments; the
toughness went out of the face, the hardness out of the eyes; and, the
face, chastened and refined, was irradiated from an inner life of
communion with beauty and knowledge.  The apparition was very like his
present self, and, as he regarded it, he noted the student-lamp by which
it was illuminated, and the book over which it pored.  He glanced at the
title and read, "The Science of AEsthetics."  Next, he entered into the
apparition, trimmed the student-lamp, and himself went on reading "The
Science of AEsthetics."


