

CHAPTER XXX


On a beautiful fall day, a day of similar Indian summer to that which had
seen their love declared the year before, Martin read his "Love-cycle" to
Ruth.  It was in the afternoon, and, as before, they had ridden out to
their favorite knoll in the hills.  Now and again she had interrupted his
reading with exclamations of pleasure, and now, as he laid the last sheet
of manuscript with its fellows, he waited her judgment.

She delayed to speak, and at last she spoke haltingly, hesitating to
frame in words the harshness of her thought.

"I think they are beautiful, very beautiful," she said; "but you can't
sell them, can you?  You see what I mean," she said, almost pleaded.
"This writing of yours is not practical.  Something is the matter--maybe
it is with the market--that prevents you from earning a living by it.  And
please, dear, don't misunderstand me.  I am flattered, and made proud,
and all that--I could not be a true woman were it otherwise--that you
should write these poems to me.  But they do not make our marriage
possible.  Don't you see, Martin?  Don't think me mercenary.  It is love,
the thought of our future, with which I am burdened.  A whole year has
gone by since we learned we loved each other, and our wedding day is no
nearer.  Don't think me immodest in thus talking about our wedding, for
really I have my heart, all that I am, at stake.  Why don't you try to
get work on a newspaper, if you are so bound up in your writing?  Why not
become a reporter?--for a while, at least?"

"It would spoil my style," was his answer, in a low, monotonous voice.
"You have no idea how I've worked for style."

"But those storiettes," she argued.  "You called them hack-work.  You
wrote many of them.  Didn't they spoil your style?"

"No, the cases are different.  The storiettes were ground out, jaded, at
the end of a long day of application to style.  But a reporter's work is
all hack from morning till night, is the one paramount thing of life.  And
it is a whirlwind life, the life of the moment, with neither past nor
future, and certainly without thought of any style but reportorial style,
and that certainly is not literature.  To become a reporter now, just as
my style is taking form, crystallizing, would be to commit literary
suicide.  As it is, every storiette, every word of every storiette, was a
violation of myself, of my self-respect, of my respect for beauty.  I
tell you it was sickening.  I was guilty of sin.  And I was secretly glad
when the markets failed, even if my clothes did go into pawn.  But the
joy of writing the 'Love-cycle'!  The creative joy in its noblest form!
That was compensation for everything."

Martin did not know that Ruth was unsympathetic concerning the creative
joy.  She used the phrase--it was on her lips he had first heard it.  She
had read about it, studied about it, in the university in the course of
earning her Bachelorship of Arts; but she was not original, not creative,
and all manifestations of culture on her part were but harpings of the
harpings of others.

"May not the editor have been right in his revision of your 'Sea
Lyrics'?" she questioned.  "Remember, an editor must have proved
qualifications or else he would not be an editor."

"That's in line with the persistence of the established," he rejoined,
his heat against the editor-folk getting the better of him.  "What is, is
not only right, but is the best possible.  The existence of anything is
sufficient vindication of its fitness to exist--to exist, mark you, as
the average person unconsciously believes, not merely in present
conditions, but in all conditions.  It is their ignorance, of course,
that makes them believe such rot--their ignorance, which is nothing more
nor less than the henidical mental process described by Weininger.  They
think they think, and such thinkless creatures are the arbiters of the
lives of the few who really think."

He paused, overcome by the consciousness that he had been talking over
Ruth's head.

"I'm sure I don't know who this Weininger is," she retorted.  "And you
are so dreadfully general that I fail to follow you.  What I was speaking
of was the qualification of editors--"

"And I'll tell you," he interrupted.  "The chief qualification of ninety-
nine per cent of all editors is failure.  They have failed as writers.
Don't think they prefer the drudgery of the desk and the slavery to their
circulation and to the business manager to the joy of writing.  They have
tried to write, and they have failed.  And right there is the cursed
paradox of it.  Every portal to success in literature is guarded by those
watch-dogs, the failures in literature.  The editors, sub-editors,
associate editors, most of them, and the manuscript-readers for the
magazines and book-publishers, most of them, nearly all of them, are men
who wanted to write and who have failed.  And yet they, of all creatures
under the sun the most unfit, are the very creatures who decide what
shall and what shall not find its way into print--they, who have proved
themselves not original, who have demonstrated that they lack the divine
fire, sit in judgment upon originality and genius.  And after them come
the reviewers, just so many more failures.  Don't tell me that they have
not dreamed the dream and attempted to write poetry or fiction; for they
have, and they have failed.  Why, the average review is more nauseating
than cod-liver oil.  But you know my opinion on the reviewers and the
alleged critics.  There are great critics, but they are as rare as
comets.  If I fail as a writer, I shall have proved for the career of
editorship.  There's bread and butter and jam, at any rate."

Ruth's mind was quick, and her disapproval of her lover's views was
buttressed by the contradiction she found in his contention.

"But, Martin, if that be so, if all the doors are closed as you have
shown so conclusively, how is it possible that any of the great writers
ever arrived?"

"They arrived by achieving the impossible," he answered.  "They did such
blazing, glorious work as to burn to ashes those that opposed them.  They
arrived by course of miracle, by winning a thousand-to-one wager against
them.  They arrived because they were Carlyle's battle-scarred giants who
will not be kept down.  And that is what I must do; I must achieve the
impossible."

"But if you fail?  You must consider me as well, Martin."

"If I fail?"  He regarded her for a moment as though the thought she had
uttered was unthinkable.  Then intelligence illumined his eyes.  "If I
fail, I shall become an editor, and you will be an editor's wife."

She frowned at his facetiousness--a pretty, adorable frown that made him
put his arm around her and kiss it away.

"There, that's enough," she urged, by an effort of will withdrawing
herself from the fascination of his strength.  "I have talked with father
and mother.  I never before asserted myself so against them.  I demanded
to be heard.  I was very undutiful.  They are against you, you know; but
I assured them over and over of my abiding love for you, and at last
father agreed that if you wanted to, you could begin right away in his
office.  And then, of his own accord, he said he would pay you enough at
the start so that we could get married and have a little cottage
somewhere.  Which I think was very fine of him--don't you?"

Martin, with the dull pain of despair at his heart, mechanically reaching
for the tobacco and paper (which he no longer carried) to roll a
cigarette, muttered something inarticulate, and Ruth went on.

"Frankly, though, and don't let it hurt you--I tell you, to show you
precisely how you stand with him--he doesn't like your radical views, and
he thinks you are lazy.  Of course I know you are not.  I know you work
hard."

How hard, even she did not know, was the thought in Martin's mind.

"Well, then," he said, "how about my views?  Do you think they are so
radical?"

He held her eyes and waited the answer.

"I think them, well, very disconcerting," she replied.

The question was answered for him, and so oppressed was he by the
grayness of life that he forgot the tentative proposition she had made
for him to go to work.  And she, having gone as far as she dared, was
willing to wait the answer till she should bring the question up again.

She had not long to wait.  Martin had a question of his own to propound
to her.  He wanted to ascertain the measure of her faith in him, and
within the week each was answered.  Martin precipitated it by reading to
her his "The Shame of the Sun."

"Why don't you become a reporter?" she asked when he had finished.  "You
love writing so, and I am sure you would succeed.  You could rise in
journalism and make a name for yourself.  There are a number of great
special correspondents.  Their salaries are large, and their field is the
world.  They are sent everywhere, to the heart of Africa, like Stanley,
or to interview the Pope, or to explore unknown Thibet."

"Then you don't like my essay?" he rejoined.  "You believe that I have
some show in journalism but none in literature?"

"No, no; I do like it.  It reads well.  But I am afraid it's over the
heads of your readers.  At least it is over mine.  It sounds beautiful,
but I don't understand it.  Your scientific slang is beyond me.  You are
an extremist, you know, dear, and what may be intelligible to you may not
be intelligible to the rest of us."

"I imagine it's the philosophic slang that bothers you," was all he could
say.

He was flaming from the fresh reading of the ripest thought he had
expressed, and her verdict stunned him.

"No matter how poorly it is done," he persisted, "don't you see anything
in it?--in the thought of it, I mean?"

She shook her head.

"No, it is so different from anything I have read.  I read Maeterlinck
and understand him--"

"His mysticism, you understand that?" Martin flashed out.

"Yes, but this of yours, which is supposed to be an attack upon him, I
don't understand.  Of course, if originality counts--"

He stopped her with an impatient gesture that was not followed by speech.
He became suddenly aware that she was speaking and that she had been
speaking for some time.

"After all, your writing has been a toy to you," she was saying.  "Surely
you have played with it long enough.  It is time to take up life
seriously--_our_ life, Martin.  Hitherto you have lived solely your own."

"You want me to go to work?" he asked.

"Yes.  Father has offered--"

"I understand all that," he broke in; "but what I want to know is whether
or not you have lost faith in me?"

She pressed his hand mutely, her eyes dim.

"In your writing, dear," she admitted in a half-whisper.

"You've read lots of my stuff," he went on brutally.  "What do you think
of it?  Is it utterly hopeless?  How does it compare with other men's
work?"

"But they sell theirs, and you--don't."

"That doesn't answer my question.  Do you think that literature is not at
all my vocation?"

"Then I will answer."  She steeled herself to do it.  "I don't think you
were made to write.  Forgive me, dear.  You compel me to say it; and you
know I know more about literature than you do."

"Yes, you are a Bachelor of Arts," he said meditatively; "and you ought
to know."

"But there is more to be said," he continued, after a pause painful to
both.  "I know what I have in me.  No one knows that so well as I.  I
know I shall succeed.  I will not be kept down.  I am afire with what I
have to say in verse, and fiction, and essay.  I do not ask you to have
faith in that, though.  I do not ask you to have faith in me, nor in my
writing.  What I do ask of you is to love me and have faith in love."

"A year ago I believed for two years.  One of those years is yet to run.
And I do believe, upon my honor and my soul, that before that year is run
I shall have succeeded.  You remember what you told me long ago, that I
must serve my apprenticeship to writing.  Well, I have served it.  I have
crammed it and telescoped it.  With you at the end awaiting me, I have
never shirked.  Do you know, I have forgotten what it is to fall
peacefully asleep.  A few million years ago I knew what it was to sleep
my fill and to awake naturally from very glut of sleep.  I am awakened
always now by an alarm clock.  If I fall asleep early or late, I set the
alarm accordingly; and this, and the putting out of the lamp, are my last
conscious actions."

"When I begin to feel drowsy, I change the heavy book I am reading for a
lighter one.  And when I doze over that, I beat my head with my knuckles
in order to drive sleep away.  Somewhere I read of a man who was afraid
to sleep.  Kipling wrote the story.  This man arranged a spur so that
when unconsciousness came, his naked body pressed against the iron teeth.
Well, I've done the same.  I look at the time, and I resolve that not
until midnight, or not until one o'clock, or two o'clock, or three
o'clock, shall the spur be removed.  And so it rowels me awake until the
appointed time.  That spur has been my bed-mate for months.  I have grown
so desperate that five and a half hours of sleep is an extravagance.  I
sleep four hours now.  I am starved for sleep.  There are times when I am
light-headed from want of sleep, times when death, with its rest and
sleep, is a positive lure to me, times when I am haunted by Longfellow's
lines:

   "'The sea is still and deep;
   All things within its bosom sleep;
   A single step and all is o'er,
   A plunge, a bubble, and no more.'

"Of course, this is sheer nonsense.  It comes from nervousness, from an
overwrought mind.  But the point is: Why have I done this?  For you.  To
shorten my apprenticeship.  To compel Success to hasten.  And my
apprenticeship is now served.  I know my equipment.  I swear that I learn
more each month than the average college man learns in a year.  I know
it, I tell you.  But were my need for you to understand not so desperate
I should not tell you.  It is not boasting.  I measure the results by the
books.  Your brothers, to-day, are ignorant barbarians compared with me
and the knowledge I have wrung from the books in the hours they were
sleeping.  Long ago I wanted to be famous.  I care very little for fame
now.  What I want is you; I am more hungry for you than for food, or
clothing, or recognition.  I have a dream of laying my head on your
breast and sleeping an aeon or so, and the dream will come true ere
another year is gone."

His power beat against her, wave upon wave; and in the moment his will
opposed hers most she felt herself most strongly drawn toward him.  The
strength that had always poured out from him to her was now flowering in
his impassioned voice, his flashing eyes, and the vigor of life and
intellect surging in him.  And in that moment, and for the moment, she
was aware of a rift that showed in her certitude--a rift through which
she caught sight of the real Martin Eden, splendid and invincible; and as
animal-trainers have their moments of doubt, so she, for the instant,
seemed to doubt her power to tame this wild spirit of a man.

"And another thing," he swept on.  "You love me.  But why do you love me?
The thing in me that compels me to write is the very thing that draws
your love.  You love me because I am somehow different from the men you
have known and might have loved.  I was not made for the desk and
counting-house, for petty business squabbling, and legal jangling.  Make
me do such things, make me like those other men, doing the work they do,
breathing the air they breathe, developing the point of view they have
developed, and you have destroyed the difference, destroyed me, destroyed
the thing you love.  My desire to write is the most vital thing in me.
Had I been a mere clod, neither would I have desired to write, nor would
you have desired me for a husband."

"But you forget," she interrupted, the quick surface of her mind
glimpsing a parallel.  "There have been eccentric inventors, starving
their families while they sought such chimeras as perpetual motion.
Doubtless their wives loved them, and suffered with them and for them,
not because of but in spite of their infatuation for perpetual motion."

"True," was the reply.  "But there have been inventors who were not
eccentric and who starved while they sought to invent practical things;
and sometimes, it is recorded, they succeeded.  Certainly I do not seek
any impossibilities--"

"You have called it 'achieving the impossible,'" she interpolated.

"I spoke figuratively.  I seek to do what men have done before me--to
write and to live by my writing."

Her silence spurred him on.

"To you, then, my goal is as much a chimera as perpetual motion?" he
demanded.

He read her answer in the pressure of her hand on his--the pitying mother-
hand for the hurt child.  And to her, just then, he was the hurt child,
the infatuated man striving to achieve the impossible.

Toward the close of their talk she warned him again of the antagonism of
her father and mother.

"But you love me?" he asked.

"I do!  I do!" she cried.

"And I love you, not them, and nothing they do can hurt me."  Triumph
sounded in his voice.  "For I have faith in your love, not fear of their
enmity.  All things may go astray in this world, but not love.  Love
cannot go wrong unless it be a weakling that faints and stumbles by the
way."


