

CHAPTER XXXI


Martin had encountered his sister Gertrude by chance on Broadway--as it
proved, a most propitious yet disconcerting chance.  Waiting on the
corner for a car, she had seen him first, and noted the eager, hungry
lines of his face and the desperate, worried look of his eyes.  In truth,
he was desperate and worried.  He had just come from a fruitless
interview with the pawnbroker, from whom he had tried to wring an
additional loan on his wheel.  The muddy fall weather having come on,
Martin had pledged his wheel some time since and retained his black suit.

"There's the black suit," the pawnbroker, who knew his every asset, had
answered.  "You needn't tell me you've gone and pledged it with that Jew,
Lipka.  Because if you have--"

The man had looked the threat, and Martin hastened to cry:-

"No, no; I've got it.  But I want to wear it on a matter of business."

"All right," the mollified usurer had replied.  "And I want it on a
matter of business before I can let you have any more money.  You don't
think I'm in it for my health?"

"But it's a forty-dollar wheel, in good condition," Martin had argued.
"And you've only let me have seven dollars on it.  No, not even seven.
Six and a quarter; you took the interest in advance."

"If you want some more, bring the suit," had been the reply that sent
Martin out of the stuffy little den, so desperate at heart as to reflect
it in his face and touch his sister to pity.

Scarcely had they met when the Telegraph Avenue car came along and
stopped to take on a crowd of afternoon shoppers.  Mrs. Higginbotham
divined from the grip on her arm as he helped her on, that he was not
going to follow her.  She turned on the step and looked down upon him.
His haggard face smote her to the heart again.

"Ain't you comin'?" she asked

The next moment she had descended to his side.

"I'm walking--exercise, you know," he explained.

"Then I'll go along for a few blocks," she announced.  "Mebbe it'll do me
good.  I ain't ben feelin' any too spry these last few days."

Martin glanced at her and verified her statement in her general slovenly
appearance, in the unhealthy fat, in the drooping shoulders, the tired
face with the sagging lines, and in the heavy fall of her feet, without
elasticity--a very caricature of the walk that belongs to a free and
happy body.

"You'd better stop here," he said, though she had already come to a halt
at the first corner, "and take the next car."

"My goodness!--if I ain't all tired a'ready!" she panted.  "But I'm just
as able to walk as you in them soles.  They're that thin they'll bu'st
long before you git out to North Oakland."

"I've a better pair at home," was the answer.

"Come out to dinner to-morrow," she invited irrelevantly.  "Mr.
Higginbotham won't be there.  He's goin' to San Leandro on business."

Martin shook his head, but he had failed to keep back the wolfish, hungry
look that leapt into his eyes at the suggestion of dinner.

"You haven't a penny, Mart, and that's why you're walkin'.  Exercise!"
She tried to sniff contemptuously, but succeeded in producing only a
sniffle.  "Here, lemme see."

And, fumbling in her satchel, she pressed a five-dollar piece into his
hand.  "I guess I forgot your last birthday, Mart," she mumbled lamely.

Martin's hand instinctively closed on the piece of gold.  In the same
instant he knew he ought not to accept, and found himself struggling in
the throes of indecision.  That bit of gold meant food, life, and light
in his body and brain, power to go on writing, and--who was to say?--maybe
to write something that would bring in many pieces of gold.  Clear on his
vision burned the manuscripts of two essays he had just completed.  He
saw them under the table on top of the heap of returned manuscripts for
which he had no stamps, and he saw their titles, just as he had typed
them--"The High Priests of Mystery," and "The Cradle of Beauty."  He had
never submitted them anywhere.  They were as good as anything he had done
in that line.  If only he had stamps for them!  Then the certitude of his
ultimate success rose up in him, an able ally of hunger, and with a quick
movement he slipped the coin into his pocket.

"I'll pay you back, Gertrude, a hundred times over," he gulped out, his
throat painfully contracted and in his eyes a swift hint of moisture.

"Mark my words!" he cried with abrupt positiveness.  "Before the year is
out I'll put an even hundred of those little yellow-boys into your hand.
I don't ask you to believe me.  All you have to do is wait and see."

Nor did she believe.  Her incredulity made her uncomfortable, and failing
of other expedient, she said:-

"I know you're hungry, Mart.  It's sticking out all over you.  Come in to
meals any time.  I'll send one of the children to tell you when Mr.
Higginbotham ain't to be there.  An' Mart--"

He waited, though he knew in his secret heart what she was about to say,
so visible was her thought process to him.

"Don't you think it's about time you got a job?"

"You don't think I'll win out?" he asked.

She shook her head.

"Nobody has faith in me, Gertrude, except myself."  His voice was
passionately rebellious.  "I've done good work already, plenty of it, and
sooner or later it will sell."

"How do you know it is good?"

"Because--"  He faltered as the whole vast field of literature and the
history of literature stirred in his brain and pointed the futility of
his attempting to convey to her the reasons for his faith.  "Well,
because it's better than ninety-nine per cent of what is published in the
magazines."

"I wish't you'd listen to reason," she answered feebly, but with
unwavering belief in the correctness of her diagnosis of what was ailing
him.  "I wish't you'd listen to reason," she repeated, "an' come to
dinner to-morrow."

After Martin had helped her on the car, he hurried to the post-office and
invested three of the five dollars in stamps; and when, later in the day,
on the way to the Morse home, he stopped in at the post-office to weigh a
large number of long, bulky envelopes, he affixed to them all the stamps
save three of the two-cent denomination.

It proved a momentous night for Martin, for after dinner he met Russ
Brissenden.  How he chanced to come there, whose friend he was or what
acquaintance brought him, Martin did not know.  Nor had he the curiosity
to inquire about him of Ruth.  In short, Brissenden struck Martin as
anaemic and feather-brained, and was promptly dismissed from his mind.  An
hour later he decided that Brissenden was a boor as well, what of the way
he prowled about from one room to another, staring at the pictures or
poking his nose into books and magazines he picked up from the table or
drew from the shelves.  Though a stranger in the house he finally
isolated himself in the midst of the company, huddling into a capacious
Morris chair and reading steadily from a thin volume he had drawn from
his pocket.  As he read, he abstractedly ran his fingers, with a
caressing movement, through his hair.  Martin noticed him no more that
evening, except once when he observed him chaffing with great apparent
success with several of the young women.

It chanced that when Martin was leaving, he overtook Brissenden already
half down the walk to the street.

"Hello, is that you?" Martin said.

The other replied with an ungracious grunt, but swung alongside.  Martin
made no further attempt at conversation, and for several blocks unbroken
silence lay upon them.

"Pompous old ass!"

The suddenness and the virulence of the exclamation startled Martin.  He
felt amused, and at the same time was aware of a growing dislike for the
other.

"What do you go to such a place for?" was abruptly flung at him after
another block of silence.

"Why do you?" Martin countered.

"Bless me, I don't know," came back.  "At least this is my first
indiscretion.  There are twenty-four hours in each day, and I must spend
them somehow.  Come and have a drink."

"All right," Martin answered.

The next moment he was nonplussed by the readiness of his acceptance.  At
home was several hours' hack-work waiting for him before he went to bed,
and after he went to bed there was a volume of Weismann waiting for him,
to say nothing of Herbert Spencer's Autobiography, which was as replete
for him with romance as any thrilling novel.  Why should he waste any
time with this man he did not like? was his thought.  And yet, it was not
so much the man nor the drink as was it what was associated with the
drink--the bright lights, the mirrors and dazzling array of glasses, the
warm and glowing faces and the resonant hum of the voices of men.  That
was it, it was the voices of men, optimistic men, men who breathed
success and spent their money for drinks like men.  He was lonely, that
was what was the matter with him; that was why he had snapped at the
invitation as a bonita strikes at a white rag on a hook.  Not since with
Joe, at Shelly Hot Springs, with the one exception of the wine he took
with the Portuguese grocer, had Martin had a drink at a public bar.
Mental exhaustion did not produce a craving for liquor such as physical
exhaustion did, and he had felt no need for it.  But just now he felt
desire for the drink, or, rather, for the atmosphere wherein drinks were
dispensed and disposed of.  Such a place was the Grotto, where Brissenden
and he lounged in capacious leather chairs and drank Scotch and soda.

They talked.  They talked about many things, and now Brissenden and now
Martin took turn in ordering Scotch and soda.  Martin, who was extremely
strong-headed, marvelled at the other's capacity for liquor, and ever and
anon broke off to marvel at the other's conversation.  He was not long in
assuming that Brissenden knew everything, and in deciding that here was
the second intellectual man he had met.  But he noted that Brissenden had
what Professor Caldwell lacked--namely, fire, the flashing insight and
perception, the flaming uncontrol of genius.  Living language flowed from
him.  His thin lips, like the dies of a machine, stamped out phrases that
cut and stung; or again, pursing caressingly about the inchoate sound
they articulated, the thin lips shaped soft and velvety things, mellow
phrases of glow and glory, of haunting beauty, reverberant of the mystery
and inscrutableness of life; and yet again the thin lips were like a
bugle, from which rang the crash and tumult of cosmic strife, phrases
that sounded clear as silver, that were luminous as starry spaces, that
epitomized the final word of science and yet said something more--the
poet's word, the transcendental truth, elusive and without words which
could express, and which none the less found expression in the subtle and
all but ungraspable connotations of common words.  He, by some wonder of
vision, saw beyond the farthest outpost of empiricism, where was no
language for narration, and yet, by some golden miracle of speech,
investing known words with unknown significances, he conveyed to Martin's
consciousness messages that were incommunicable to ordinary souls.

Martin forgot his first impression of dislike.  Here was the best the
books had to offer coming true.  Here was an intelligence, a living man
for him to look up to.  "I am down in the dirt at your feet," Martin
repeated to himself again and again.

"You've studied biology," he said aloud, in significant allusion.

To his surprise Brissenden shook his head.

"But you are stating truths that are substantiated only by biology,"
Martin insisted, and was rewarded by a blank stare.  "Your conclusions
are in line with the books which you must have read."

"I am glad to hear it," was the answer.  "That my smattering of knowledge
should enable me to short-cut my way to truth is most reassuring.  As for
myself, I never bother to find out if I am right or not.  It is all
valueless anyway.  Man can never know the ultimate verities."

"You are a disciple of Spencer!" Martin cried triumphantly.

"I haven't read him since adolescence, and all I read then was his
'Education.'"

"I wish I could gather knowledge as carelessly," Martin broke out half an
hour later.  He had been closely analyzing Brissenden's mental equipment.
"You are a sheer dogmatist, and that's what makes it so marvellous.  You
state dogmatically the latest facts which science has been able to
establish only by a posteriori reasoning.  You jump at correct
conclusions.  You certainly short-cut with a vengeance.  You feel your
way with the speed of light, by some hyperrational process, to truth."

"Yes, that was what used to bother Father Joseph, and Brother Dutton,"
Brissenden replied.  "Oh, no," he added; "I am not anything.  It was a
lucky trick of fate that sent me to a Catholic college for my education.
Where did you pick up what you know?"

And while Martin told him, he was busy studying Brissenden, ranging from
a long, lean, aristocratic face and drooping shoulders to the overcoat on
a neighboring chair, its pockets sagged and bulged by the freightage of
many books.  Brissenden's face and long, slender hands were browned by
the sun--excessively browned, Martin thought.  This sunburn bothered
Martin.  It was patent that Brissenden was no outdoor man.  Then how had
he been ravaged by the sun?  Something morbid and significant attached to
that sunburn, was Martin's thought as he returned to a study of the face,
narrow, with high cheek-bones and cavernous hollows, and graced with as
delicate and fine an aquiline nose as Martin had ever seen.  There was
nothing remarkable about the size of the eyes.  They were neither large
nor small, while their color was a nondescript brown; but in them
smouldered a fire, or, rather, lurked an expression dual and strangely
contradictory.  Defiant, indomitable, even harsh to excess, they at the
same time aroused pity.  Martin found himself pitying him he knew not
why, though he was soon to learn.

"Oh, I'm a lunger," Brissenden announced, offhand, a little later, having
already stated that he came from Arizona.  "I've been down there a couple
of years living on the climate."

"Aren't you afraid to venture it up in this climate?"

"Afraid?"

There was no special emphasis of his repetition of Martin's word.  But
Martin saw in that ascetic face the advertisement that there was nothing
of which it was afraid.  The eyes had narrowed till they were eagle-like,
and Martin almost caught his breath as he noted the eagle beak with its
dilated nostrils, defiant, assertive, aggressive.  Magnificent, was what
he commented to himself, his blood thrilling at the sight.  Aloud, he
quoted:-

   "'Under the bludgeoning of Chance
   My head is bloody but unbowed.'"

"You like Henley," Brissenden said, his expression changing swiftly to
large graciousness and tenderness.  "Of course, I couldn't have expected
anything else of you.  Ah, Henley!  A brave soul.  He stands out among
contemporary rhymesters--magazine rhymesters--as a gladiator stands out
in the midst of a band of eunuchs."

"You don't like the magazines," Martin softly impeached.

"Do you?" was snarled back at him so savagely as to startle him.

"I--I write, or, rather, try to write, for the magazines," Martin
faltered.

"That's better," was the mollified rejoinder.  "You try to write, but you
don't succeed.  I respect and admire your failure.  I know what you
write.  I can see it with half an eye, and there's one ingredient in it
that shuts it out of the magazines.  It's guts, and magazines have no use
for that particular commodity.  What they want is wish-wash and slush,
and God knows they get it, but not from you."

"I'm not above hack-work," Martin contended.

"On the contrary--"  Brissenden paused and ran an insolent eye over
Martin's objective poverty, passing from the well-worn tie and the saw-
edged collar to the shiny sleeves of the coat and on to the slight fray
of one cuff, winding up and dwelling upon Martin's sunken cheeks.  "On
the contrary, hack-work is above you, so far above you that you can never
hope to rise to it.  Why, man, I could insult you by asking you to have
something to eat."

Martin felt the heat in his face of the involuntary blood, and Brissenden
laughed triumphantly.

"A full man is not insulted by such an invitation," he concluded.

"You are a devil," Martin cried irritably.

"Anyway, I didn't ask you."

"You didn't dare."

"Oh, I don't know about that.  I invite you now."

Brissenden half rose from his chair as he spoke, as if with the intention
of departing to the restaurant forthwith.

Martin's fists were tight-clenched, and his blood was drumming in his
temples.

"Bosco!  He eats 'em alive!  Eats 'em alive!"  Brissenden exclaimed,
imitating the spieler of a locally famous snake-eater.

"I could certainly eat you alive," Martin said, in turn running insolent
eyes over the other's disease-ravaged frame.

"Only I'm not worthy of it?"

"On the contrary," Martin considered, "because the incident is not
worthy."  He broke into a laugh, hearty and wholesome.  "I confess you
made a fool of me, Brissenden.  That I am hungry and you are aware of it
are only ordinary phenomena, and there's no disgrace.  You see, I laugh
at the conventional little moralities of the herd; then you drift by, say
a sharp, true word, and immediately I am the slave of the same little
moralities."

"You were insulted," Brissenden affirmed.

"I certainly was, a moment ago.  The prejudice of early youth, you know.
I learned such things then, and they cheapen what I have since learned.
They are the skeletons in my particular closet."

"But you've got the door shut on them now?"

"I certainly have."

"Sure?"

"Sure."

"Then let's go and get something to eat."

"I'll go you," Martin answered, attempting to pay for the current Scotch
and soda with the last change from his two dollars and seeing the waiter
bullied by Brissenden into putting that change back on the table.

Martin pocketed it with a grimace, and felt for a moment the kindly
weight of Brissenden's hand upon his shoulder.


