

CHAPTER XXXIII


Martin was steadily losing his battle.  Economize as he would, the
earnings from hack-work did not balance expenses.  Thanksgiving found him
with his black suit in pawn and unable to accept the Morses' invitation
to dinner.  Ruth was not made happy by his reason for not coming, and the
corresponding effect on him was one of desperation.  He told her that he
would come, after all; that he would go over to San Francisco, to the
Transcontinental office, collect the five dollars due him, and with it
redeem his suit of clothes.

In the morning he borrowed ten cents from Maria.  He would have borrowed
it, by preference, from Brissenden, but that erratic individual had
disappeared.  Two weeks had passed since Martin had seen him, and he
vainly cudgelled his brains for some cause of offence.  The ten cents
carried Martin across the ferry to San Francisco, and as he walked up
Market Street he speculated upon his predicament in case he failed to
collect the money.  There would then be no way for him to return to
Oakland, and he knew no one in San Francisco from whom to borrow another
ten cents.

The door to the Transcontinental office was ajar, and Martin, in the act
of opening it, was brought to a sudden pause by a loud voice from within,
which exclaimed:- "But that is not the question, Mr. Ford."  (Ford,
Martin knew, from his correspondence, to be the editor's name.)  "The
question is, are you prepared to pay?--cash, and cash down, I mean?  I am
not interested in the prospects of the Transcontinental and what you
expect to make it next year.  What I want is to be paid for what I do.
And I tell you, right now, the Christmas Transcontinental don't go to
press till I have the money in my hand.  Good day.  When you get the
money, come and see me."

The door jerked open, and the man flung past Martin, with an angry
countenance and went down the corridor, muttering curses and clenching
his fists.  Martin decided not to enter immediately, and lingered in the
hallways for a quarter of an hour.  Then he shoved the door open and
walked in.  It was a new experience, the first time he had been inside an
editorial office.  Cards evidently were not necessary in that office, for
the boy carried word to an inner room that there was a man who wanted to
see Mr. Ford.  Returning, the boy beckoned him from halfway across the
room and led him to the private office, the editorial sanctum.  Martin's
first impression was of the disorder and cluttered confusion of the room.
Next he noticed a bewhiskered, youthful-looking man, sitting at a roll-
top desk, who regarded him curiously.  Martin marvelled at the calm
repose of his face.  It was evident that the squabble with the printer
had not affected his equanimity.

"I--I am Martin Eden," Martin began the conversation.  ("And I want my
five dollars," was what he would have liked to say.)

But this was his first editor, and under the circumstances he did not
desire to scare him too abruptly.  To his surprise, Mr. Ford leaped into
the air with a "You don't say so!" and the next moment, with both hands,
was shaking Martin's hand effusively.

"Can't say how glad I am to see you, Mr. Eden.  Often wondered what you
were like."

Here he held Martin off at arm's length and ran his beaming eyes over
Martin's second-best suit, which was also his worst suit, and which was
ragged and past repair, though the trousers showed the careful crease he
had put in with Maria's flat-irons.

"I confess, though, I conceived you to be a much older man than you are.
Your story, you know, showed such breadth, and vigor, such maturity and
depth of thought.  A masterpiece, that story--I knew it when I had read
the first half-dozen lines.  Let me tell you how I first read it.  But
no; first let me introduce you to the staff."

Still talking, Mr. Ford led him into the general office, where he
introduced him to the associate editor, Mr. White, a slender, frail
little man whose hand seemed strangely cold, as if he were suffering from
a chill, and whose whiskers were sparse and silky.

"And Mr. Ends, Mr. Eden.  Mr. Ends is our business manager, you know."

Martin found himself shaking hands with a cranky-eyed, bald-headed man,
whose face looked youthful enough from what little could be seen of it,
for most of it was covered by a snow-white beard, carefully trimmed--by
his wife, who did it on Sundays, at which times she also shaved the back
of his neck.

The three men surrounded Martin, all talking admiringly and at once,
until it seemed to him that they were talking against time for a wager.

"We often wondered why you didn't call," Mr. White was saying.

"I didn't have the carfare, and I live across the Bay," Martin answered
bluntly, with the idea of showing them his imperative need for the money.

Surely, he thought to himself, my glad rags in themselves are eloquent
advertisement of my need.  Time and again, whenever opportunity offered,
he hinted about the purpose of his business.  But his admirers' ears were
deaf.  They sang his praises, told him what they had thought of his story
at first sight, what they subsequently thought, what their wives and
families thought; but not one hint did they breathe of intention to pay
him for it.

"Did I tell you how I first read your story?" Mr. Ford said.  "Of course
I didn't.  I was coming west from New York, and when the train stopped at
Ogden, the train-boy on the new run brought aboard the current number of
the Transcontinental."

My God! Martin thought; you can travel in a Pullman while I starve for
the paltry five dollars you owe me.  A wave of anger rushed over him.  The
wrong done him by the Transcontinental loomed colossal, for strong upon
him were all the dreary months of vain yearning, of hunger and privation,
and his present hunger awoke and gnawed at him, reminding him that he had
eaten nothing since the day before, and little enough then.  For the
moment he saw red.  These creatures were not even robbers.  They were
sneak-thieves.  By lies and broken promises they had tricked him out of
his story.  Well, he would show them.  And a great resolve surged into
his will to the effect that he would not leave the office until he got
his money.  He remembered, if he did not get it, that there was no way
for him to go back to Oakland.  He controlled himself with an effort, but
not before the wolfish expression of his face had awed and perturbed
them.

They became more voluble than ever.  Mr. Ford started anew to tell how he
had first read "The Ring of Bells," and Mr. Ends at the same time was
striving to repeat his niece's appreciation of "The Ring of Bells," said
niece being a school-teacher in Alameda.

"I'll tell you what I came for," Martin said finally.  "To be paid for
that story all of you like so well.  Five dollars, I believe, is what you
promised me would be paid on publication."

Mr. Ford, with an expression on his mobile features of mediate and happy
acquiescence, started to reach for his pocket, then turned suddenly to
Mr. Ends, and said that he had left his money home.  That Mr. Ends
resented this, was patent; and Martin saw the twitch of his arm as if to
protect his trousers pocket.  Martin knew that the money was there.

"I am sorry," said Mr. Ends, "but I paid the printer not an hour ago, and
he took my ready change.  It was careless of me to be so short; but the
bill was not yet due, and the printer's request, as a favor, to make an
immediate advance, was quite unexpected."

Both men looked expectantly at Mr. White, but that gentleman laughed and
shrugged his shoulders.  His conscience was clean at any rate.  He had
come into the Transcontinental to learn magazine-literature, instead of
which he had principally learned finance.  The Transcontinental owed him
four months' salary, and he knew that the printer must be appeased before
the associate editor.

"It's rather absurd, Mr. Eden, to have caught us in this shape," Mr. Ford
preambled airily.  "All carelessness, I assure you.  But I'll tell you
what we'll do.  We'll mail you a check the first thing in the morning.
You have Mr. Eden's address, haven't you, Mr. Ends?"

Yes, Mr. Ends had the address, and the check would be mailed the first
thing in the morning.  Martin's knowledge of banks and checks was hazy,
but he could see no reason why they should not give him the check on this
day just as well as on the next.

"Then it is understood, Mr. Eden, that we'll mail you the check
to-morrow?" Mr. Ford said.

"I need the money to-day," Martin answered stolidly.

"The unfortunate circumstances--if you had chanced here any other day,"
Mr. Ford began suavely, only to be interrupted by Mr. Ends, whose cranky
eyes justified themselves in his shortness of temper.

"Mr. Ford has already explained the situation," he said with asperity.
"And so have I.  The check will be mailed--"

"I also have explained," Martin broke in, "and I have explained that I
want the money to-day."

He had felt his pulse quicken a trifle at the business manager's
brusqueness, and upon him he kept an alert eye, for it was in that
gentleman's trousers pocket that he divined the Transcontinental's ready
cash was reposing.

"It is too bad--" Mr. Ford began.

But at that moment, with an impatient movement, Mr. Ends turned as if
about to leave the room.  At the same instant Martin sprang for him,
clutching him by the throat with one hand in such fashion that Mr. Ends'
snow-white beard, still maintaining its immaculate trimness, pointed
ceilingward at an angle of forty-five degrees.  To the horror of Mr.
White and Mr. Ford, they saw their business manager shaken like an
Astrakhan rug.

"Dig up, you venerable discourager of rising young talent!" Martin
exhorted.  "Dig up, or I'll shake it out of you, even if it's all in
nickels."  Then, to the two affrighted onlookers: "Keep away!  If you
interfere, somebody's liable to get hurt."

Mr. Ends was choking, and it was not until the grip on his throat was
eased that he was able to signify his acquiescence in the digging-up
programme.  All together, after repeated digs, its trousers pocket
yielded four dollars and fifteen cents.

"Inside out with it," Martin commanded.

An additional ten cents fell out.  Martin counted the result of his raid
a second time to make sure.

"You next!" he shouted at Mr. Ford.  "I want seventy-five cents more."

Mr. Ford did not wait, but ransacked his pockets, with the result of
sixty cents.

"Sure that is all?" Martin demanded menacingly, possessing himself of it.
"What have you got in your vest pockets?"

In token of his good faith, Mr. Ford turned two of his pockets inside
out.  A strip of cardboard fell to the floor from one of them.  He
recovered it and was in the act of returning it, when Martin cried:-

"What's that?--A ferry ticket?  Here, give it to me.  It's worth ten
cents.  I'll credit you with it.  I've now got four dollars and ninety-
five cents, including the ticket.  Five cents is still due me."

He looked fiercely at Mr. White, and found that fragile creature in the
act of handing him a nickel.

"Thank you," Martin said, addressing them collectively.  "I wish you a
good day."

"Robber!" Mr. Ends snarled after him.

"Sneak-thief!" Martin retorted, slamming the door as he passed out.

Martin was elated--so elated that when he recollected that The Hornet
owed him fifteen dollars for "The Peri and the Pearl," he decided
forthwith to go and collect it.  But The Hornet was run by a set of clean-
shaven, strapping young men, frank buccaneers who robbed everything and
everybody, not excepting one another.  After some breakage of the office
furniture, the editor (an ex-college athlete), ably assisted by the
business manager, an advertising agent, and the porter, succeeded in
removing Martin from the office and in accelerating, by initial impulse,
his descent of the first flight of stairs.

"Come again, Mr. Eden; glad to see you any time," they laughed down at
him from the landing above.

Martin grinned as he picked himself up.

"Phew!" he murmured back.  "The Transcontinental crowd were nanny-goats,
but you fellows are a lot of prize-fighters."

More laughter greeted this.

"I must say, Mr. Eden," the editor of The Hornet called down, "that for a
poet you can go some yourself.  Where did you learn that right cross--if
I may ask?"

"Where you learned that half-Nelson," Martin answered.  "Anyway, you're
going to have a black eye."

"I hope your neck doesn't stiffen up," the editor wished solicitously:
"What do you say we all go out and have a drink on it--not the neck, of
course, but the little rough-house?"

"I'll go you if I lose," Martin accepted.

And robbers and robbed drank together, amicably agreeing that the battle
was to the strong, and that the fifteen dollars for "The Peri and the
Pearl" belonged by right to The Hornet's editorial staff.


