

CHAPTER XXXIV


Arthur remained at the gate while Ruth climbed Maria's front steps.  She
heard the rapid click of the type-writer, and when Martin let her in,
found him on the last page of a manuscript.  She had come to make certain
whether or not he would be at their table for Thanksgiving dinner; but
before she could broach the subject Martin plunged into the one with
which he was full.

"Here, let me read you this," he cried, separating the carbon copies and
running the pages of manuscript into shape.  "It's my latest, and
different from anything I've done.  It is so altogether different that I
am almost afraid of it, and yet I've a sneaking idea it is good.  You be
judge.  It's an Hawaiian story.  I've called it 'Wiki-wiki.'"

His face was bright with the creative glow, though she shivered in the
cold room and had been struck by the coldness of his hands at greeting.
She listened closely while he read, and though he from time to time had
seen only disapprobation in her face, at the close he asked:-

"Frankly, what do you think of it?"

"I--I don't know," she, answered.  "Will it--do you think it will sell?"

"I'm afraid not," was the confession.  "It's too strong for the
magazines.  But it's true, on my word it's true."

"But why do you persist in writing such things when you know they won't
sell?" she went on inexorably.  "The reason for your writing is to make a
living, isn't it?"

"Yes, that's right; but the miserable story got away with me.  I couldn't
help writing it.  It demanded to be written."

"But that character, that Wiki-Wiki, why do you make him talk so roughly?
Surely it will offend your readers, and surely that is why the editors
are justified in refusing your work."

"Because the real Wiki-Wiki would have talked that way."

"But it is not good taste."

"It is life," he replied bluntly.  "It is real.  It is true.  And I must
write life as I see it."

She made no answer, and for an awkward moment they sat silent.  It was
because he loved her that he did not quite understand her, and she could
not understand him because he was so large that he bulked beyond her
horizon.

"Well, I've collected from the Transcontinental," he said in an effort to
shift the conversation to a more comfortable subject.  The picture of the
bewhiskered trio, as he had last seen them, mulcted of four dollars and
ninety cents and a ferry ticket, made him chuckle.

"Then you'll come!" she cried joyously.  "That was what I came to find
out."

"Come?" he muttered absently.  "Where?"

"Why, to dinner to-morrow.  You know you said you'd recover your suit if
you got that money."

"I forgot all about it," he said humbly.  "You see, this morning the
poundman got Maria's two cows and the baby calf, and--well, it happened
that Maria didn't have any money, and so I had to recover her cows for
her.  That's where the Transcontinental fiver went--'The Ring of Bells'
went into the poundman's pocket."

"Then you won't come?"

He looked down at his clothing.

"I can't."

Tears of disappointment and reproach glistened in her blue eyes, but she
said nothing.

"Next Thanksgiving you'll have dinner with me in Delmonico's," he said
cheerily; "or in London, or Paris, or anywhere you wish.  I know it."

"I saw in the paper a few days ago," she announced abruptly, "that there
had been several local appointments to the Railway Mail.  You passed
first, didn't you?"

He was compelled to admit that the call had come for him, but that he had
declined it.  "I was so sure--I am so sure--of myself," he concluded.  "A
year from now I'll be earning more than a dozen men in the Railway Mail.
You wait and see."

"Oh," was all she said, when he finished.  She stood up, pulling at her
gloves.  "I must go, Martin.  Arthur is waiting for me."

He took her in his arms and kissed her, but she proved a passive
sweetheart.  There was no tenseness in her body, her arms did not go
around him, and her lips met his without their wonted pressure.

She was angry with him, he concluded, as he returned from the gate.  But
why?  It was unfortunate that the poundman had gobbled Maria's cows.  But
it was only a stroke of fate.  Nobody could be blamed for it.  Nor did it
enter his head that he could have done aught otherwise than what he had
done.  Well, yes, he was to blame a little, was his next thought, for
having refused the call to the Railway Mail.  And she had not liked "Wiki-
Wiki."

He turned at the head of the steps to meet the letter-carrier on his
afternoon round.  The ever recurrent fever of expectancy assailed Martin
as he took the bundle of long envelopes.  One was not long.  It was short
and thin, and outside was printed the address of The New York Outview.  He
paused in the act of tearing the envelope open.  It could not be an
acceptance.  He had no manuscripts with that publication.  Perhaps--his
heart almost stood still at the--wild thought--perhaps they were ordering
an article from him; but the next instant he dismissed the surmise as
hopelessly impossible.

It was a short, formal letter, signed by the office editor, merely
informing him that an anonymous letter which they had received was
enclosed, and that he could rest assured the Outview's staff never under
any circumstances gave consideration to anonymous correspondence.

The enclosed letter Martin found to be crudely printed by hand.  It was a
hotchpotch of illiterate abuse of Martin, and of assertion that the "so-
called Martin Eden" who was selling stories to magazines was no writer at
all, and that in reality he was stealing stories from old magazines,
typing them, and sending them out as his own.  The envelope was
postmarked "San Leandro."  Martin did not require a second thought to
discover the author.  Higginbotham's grammar, Higginbotham's
colloquialisms, Higginbotham's mental quirks and processes, were apparent
throughout.  Martin saw in every line, not the fine Italian hand, but the
coarse grocer's fist, of his brother-in-law.

But why? he vainly questioned.  What injury had he done Bernard
Higginbotham?  The thing was so unreasonable, so wanton.  There was no
explaining it.  In the course of the week a dozen similar letters were
forwarded to Martin by the editors of various Eastern magazines.  The
editors were behaving handsomely, Martin concluded.  He was wholly
unknown to them, yet some of them had even been sympathetic.  It was
evident that they detested anonymity.  He saw that the malicious attempt
to hurt him had failed.  In fact, if anything came of it, it was bound to
be good, for at least his name had been called to the attention of a
number of editors.  Sometime, perhaps, reading a submitted manuscript of
his, they might remember him as the fellow about whom they had received
an anonymous letter.  And who was to say that such a remembrance might
not sway the balance of their judgment just a trifle in his favor?

It was about this time that Martin took a great slump in Maria's
estimation.  He found her in the kitchen one morning groaning with pain,
tears of weakness running down her cheeks, vainly endeavoring to put
through a large ironing.  He promptly diagnosed her affliction as La
Grippe, dosed her with hot whiskey (the remnants in the bottles for which
Brissenden was responsible), and ordered her to bed.  But Maria was
refractory.  The ironing had to be done, she protested, and delivered
that night, or else there would be no food on the morrow for the seven
small and hungry Silvas.

To her astonishment (and it was something that she never ceased from
relating to her dying day), she saw Martin Eden seize an iron from the
stove and throw a fancy shirt-waist on the ironing-board.  It was Kate
Flanagan's best Sunday waist, than whom there was no more exacting and
fastidiously dressed woman in Maria's world.  Also, Miss Flanagan had
sent special instruction that said waist must be delivered by that night.
As every one knew, she was keeping company with John Collins, the
blacksmith, and, as Maria knew privily, Miss Flanagan and Mr. Collins
were going next day to Golden Gate Park.  Vain was Maria's attempt to
rescue the garment.  Martin guided her tottering footsteps to a chair,
from where she watched him with bulging eyes.  In a quarter of the time
it would have taken her she saw the shirt-waist safely ironed, and ironed
as well as she could have done it, as Martin made her grant.

"I could work faster," he explained, "if your irons were only hotter."

To her, the irons he swung were much hotter than she ever dared to use.

"Your sprinkling is all wrong," he complained next.  "Here, let me teach
you how to sprinkle.  Pressure is what's wanted.  Sprinkle under pressure
if you want to iron fast."

He procured a packing-case from the woodpile in the cellar, fitted a
cover to it, and raided the scrap-iron the Silva tribe was collecting for
the junkman.  With fresh-sprinkled garments in the box, covered with the
board and pressed by the iron, the device was complete and in operation.

"Now you watch me, Maria," he said, stripping off to his undershirt and
gripping an iron that was what he called "really hot."

"An' when he feenish da iron' he washa da wools," as she described it
afterward.  "He say, 'Maria, you are da greata fool.  I showa you how to
washa da wools,' an' he shows me, too.  Ten minutes he maka da
machine--one barrel, one wheel-hub, two poles, justa like dat."

Martin had learned the contrivance from Joe at the Shelly Hot Springs.
The old wheel-hub, fixed on the end of the upright pole, constituted the
plunger.  Making this, in turn, fast to the spring-pole attached to the
kitchen rafters, so that the hub played upon the woollens in the barrel,
he was able, with one hand, thoroughly to pound them.

"No more Maria washa da wools," her story always ended.  "I maka da kids
worka da pole an' da hub an' da barrel.  Him da smarta man, Mister Eden."

Nevertheless, by his masterly operation and improvement of her kitchen-
laundry he fell an immense distance in her regard.  The glamour of
romance with which her imagination had invested him faded away in the
cold light of fact that he was an ex-laundryman.  All his books, and his
grand friends who visited him in carriages or with countless bottles of
whiskey, went for naught.  He was, after all, a mere workingman, a member
of her own class and caste.  He was more human and approachable, but, he
was no longer mystery.

Martin's alienation from his family continued.  Following upon Mr.
Higginbotham's unprovoked attack, Mr. Hermann von Schmidt showed his
hand.  The fortunate sale of several storiettes, some humorous verse, and
a few jokes gave Martin a temporary splurge of prosperity.  Not only did
he partially pay up his bills, but he had sufficient balance left to
redeem his black suit and wheel.  The latter, by virtue of a twisted
crank-hanger, required repairing, and, as a matter of friendliness with
his future brother-in-law, he sent it to Von Schmidt's shop.

The afternoon of the same day Martin was pleased by the wheel being
delivered by a small boy.  Von Schmidt was also inclined to be friendly,
was Martin's conclusion from this unusual favor.  Repaired wheels usually
had to be called for.  But when he examined the wheel, he discovered no
repairs had been made.  A little later in the day he telephoned his
sister's betrothed, and learned that that person didn't want anything to
do with him in "any shape, manner, or form."

"Hermann von Schmidt," Martin answered cheerfully, "I've a good mind to
come over and punch that Dutch nose of yours."

"You come to my shop," came the reply, "an' I'll send for the police.  An'
I'll put you through, too.  Oh, I know you, but you can't make no rough-
house with me.  I don't want nothin' to do with the likes of you.  You're
a loafer, that's what, an' I ain't asleep.  You ain't goin' to do no
spongin' off me just because I'm marryin' your sister.  Why don't you go
to work an' earn an honest livin', eh?  Answer me that."

Martin's philosophy asserted itself, dissipating his anger, and he hung
up the receiver with a long whistle of incredulous amusement.  But after
the amusement came the reaction, and he was oppressed by his loneliness.
Nobody understood him, nobody seemed to have any use for him, except
Brissenden, and Brissenden had disappeared, God alone knew where.

Twilight was falling as Martin left the fruit store and turned homeward,
his marketing on his arm.  At the corner an electric car had stopped, and
at sight of a lean, familiar figure alighting, his heart leapt with joy.
It was Brissenden, and in the fleeting glimpse, ere the car started up,
Martin noted the overcoat pockets, one bulging with books, the other
bulging with a quart bottle of whiskey.


