

CHAPTER XXXVI


"Come on,--I'll show you the real dirt," Brissenden said to him, one
evening in January.

They had dined together in San Francisco, and were at the Ferry Building,
returning to Oakland, when the whim came to him to show Martin the "real
dirt."  He turned and fled across the water-front, a meagre shadow in a
flapping overcoat, with Martin straining to keep up with him.  At a
wholesale liquor store he bought two gallon-demijohns of old port, and
with one in each hand boarded a Mission Street car, Martin at his heels
burdened with several quart-bottles of whiskey.

If Ruth could see me now, was his thought, while he wondered as to what
constituted the real dirt.

"Maybe nobody will be there," Brissenden said, when they dismounted and
plunged off to the right into the heart of the working-class ghetto,
south of Market Street.  "In which case you'll miss what you've been
looking for so long."

"And what the deuce is that?" Martin asked.

"Men, intelligent men, and not the gibbering nonentities I found you
consorting with in that trader's den.  You read the books and you found
yourself all alone.  Well, I'm going to show you to-night some other men
who've read the books, so that you won't be lonely any more."

"Not that I bother my head about their everlasting discussions," he said
at the end of a block.  "I'm not interested in book philosophy.  But
you'll find these fellows intelligences and not bourgeois swine.  But
watch out, they'll talk an arm off of you on any subject under the sun."

"Hope Norton's there," he panted a little later, resisting Martin's
effort to relieve him of the two demijohns.  "Norton's an idealist--a
Harvard man.  Prodigious memory.  Idealism led him to philosophic
anarchy, and his family threw him off.  Father's a railroad president and
many times millionnaire, but the son's starving in 'Frisco, editing an
anarchist sheet for twenty-five a month."

Martin was little acquainted in San Francisco, and not at all south of
Market; so he had no idea of where he was being led.

"Go ahead," he said; "tell me about them beforehand.  What do they do for
a living?  How do they happen to be here?"

"Hope Hamilton's there."  Brissenden paused and rested his hands.  "Strawn-
Hamilton's his name--hyphenated, you know--comes of old Southern stock.
He's a tramp--laziest man I ever knew, though he's clerking, or trying
to, in a socialist cooperative store for six dollars a week.  But he's a
confirmed hobo.  Tramped into town.  I've seen him sit all day on a bench
and never a bite pass his lips, and in the evening, when I invited him to
dinner--restaurant two blocks away--have him say, 'Too much trouble, old
man.  Buy me a package of cigarettes instead.'  He was a Spencerian like
you till Kreis turned him to materialistic monism.  I'll start him on
monism if I can.  Norton's another monist--only he affirms naught but
spirit.  He can give Kreis and Hamilton all they want, too."

"Who is Kreis?" Martin asked.

"His rooms we're going to.  One time professor--fired from
university--usual story.  A mind like a steel trap.  Makes his living any
old way.  I know he's been a street fakir when he was down.  Unscrupulous.
Rob a corpse of a shroud--anything.  Difference between him--and the
bourgeoisie is that he robs without illusion.  He'll talk Nietzsche, or
Schopenhauer, or Kant, or anything, but the only thing in this world, not
excepting Mary, that he really cares for, is his monism.  Haeckel is his
little tin god.  The only way to insult him is to take a slap at
Haeckel."

"Here's the hang-out."  Brissenden rested his demijohn at the upstairs
entrance, preliminary to the climb.  It was the usual two-story corner
building, with a saloon and grocery underneath.  "The gang lives here--got
the whole upstairs to themselves.  But Kreis is the only one who has two
rooms.  Come on."

No lights burned in the upper hall, but Brissenden threaded the utter
blackness like a familiar ghost.  He stopped to speak to Martin.

"There's one fellow--Stevens--a theosophist.  Makes a pretty tangle when
he gets going.  Just now he's dish-washer in a restaurant.  Likes a good
cigar.  I've seen him eat in a ten-cent hash-house and pay fifty cents
for the cigar he smoked afterward.  I've got a couple in my pocket for
him, if he shows up."

"And there's another fellow--Parry--an Australian, a statistician and a
sporting encyclopaedia.  Ask him the grain output of Paraguay for 1903,
or the English importation of sheetings into China for 1890, or at what
weight Jimmy Britt fought Battling Nelson, or who was welter-weight
champion of the United States in '68, and you'll get the correct answer
with the automatic celerity of a slot-machine.  And there's Andy, a stone-
mason, has ideas on everything, a good chess-player; and another fellow,
Harry, a baker, red hot socialist and strong union man.  By the way, you
remember Cooks' and Waiters' strike--Hamilton was the chap who organized
that union and precipitated the strike--planned it all out in advance,
right here in Kreis's rooms.  Did it just for the fun of it, but was too
lazy to stay by the union.  Yet he could have risen high if he wanted to.
There's no end to the possibilities in that man--if he weren't so
insuperably lazy."

Brissenden advanced through the darkness till a thread of light marked
the threshold of a door.  A knock and an answer opened it, and Martin
found himself shaking hands with Kreis, a handsome brunette man, with
dazzling white teeth, a drooping black mustache, and large, flashing
black eyes.  Mary, a matronly young blonde, was washing dishes in the
little back room that served for kitchen and dining room.  The front room
served as bedchamber and living room.  Overhead was the week's washing,
hanging in festoons so low that Martin did not see at first the two men
talking in a corner.  They hailed Brissenden and his demijohns with
acclamation, and, on being introduced, Martin learned they were Andy and
Parry.  He joined them and listened attentively to the description of a
prize-fight Parry had seen the night before; while Brissenden, in his
glory, plunged into the manufacture of a toddy and the serving of wine
and whiskey-and-sodas.  At his command, "Bring in the clan," Andy
departed to go the round of the rooms for the lodgers.

"We're lucky that most of them are here," Brissenden whispered to Martin.
"There's Norton and Hamilton; come on and meet them.  Stevens isn't
around, I hear.  I'm going to get them started on monism if I can.  Wait
till they get a few jolts in them and they'll warm up."

At first the conversation was desultory.  Nevertheless Martin could not
fail to appreciate the keen play of their minds.  They were men with
opinions, though the opinions often clashed, and, though they were witty
and clever, they were not superficial.  He swiftly saw, no matter upon
what they talked, that each man applied the correlation of knowledge and
had also a deep-seated and unified conception of society and the Cosmos.
Nobody manufactured their opinions for them; they were all rebels of one
variety or another, and their lips were strangers to platitudes.  Never
had Martin, at the Morses', heard so amazing a range of topics discussed.
There seemed no limit save time to the things they were alive to.  The
talk wandered from Mrs. Humphry Ward's new book to Shaw's latest play,
through the future of the drama to reminiscences of Mansfield.  They
appreciated or sneered at the morning editorials, jumped from labor
conditions in New Zealand to Henry James and Brander Matthews, passed on
to the German designs in the Far East and the economic aspect of the
Yellow Peril, wrangled over the German elections and Bebel's last speech,
and settled down to local politics, the latest plans and scandals in the
union labor party administration, and the wires that were pulled to bring
about the Coast Seamen's strike.  Martin was struck by the inside
knowledge they possessed.  They knew what was never printed in the
newspapers--the wires and strings and the hidden hands that made the
puppets dance.  To Martin's surprise, the girl, Mary, joined in the
conversation, displaying an intelligence he had never encountered in the
few women he had met.  They talked together on Swinburne and Rossetti,
after which she led him beyond his depth into the by-paths of French
literature.  His revenge came when she defended Maeterlinck and he
brought into action the carefully-thought-out thesis of "The Shame of the
Sun."

Several other men had dropped in, and the air was thick with tobacco
smoke, when Brissenden waved the red flag.

"Here's fresh meat for your axe, Kreis," he said; "a rose-white youth
with the ardor of a lover for Herbert Spencer.  Make a Haeckelite of
him--if you can."

Kreis seemed to wake up and flash like some metallic, magnetic thing,
while Norton looked at Martin sympathetically, with a sweet, girlish
smile, as much as to say that he would be amply protected.

Kreis began directly on Martin, but step by step Norton interfered, until
he and Kreis were off and away in a personal battle.  Martin listened and
fain would have rubbed his eyes.  It was impossible that this should be,
much less in the labor ghetto south of Market.  The books were alive in
these men.  They talked with fire and enthusiasm, the intellectual
stimulant stirring them as he had seen drink and anger stir other men.
What he heard was no longer the philosophy of the dry, printed word,
written by half-mythical demigods like Kant and Spencer.  It was living
philosophy, with warm, red blood, incarnated in these two men till its
very features worked with excitement.  Now and again other men joined in,
and all followed the discussion with cigarettes going out in their hands
and with alert, intent faces.

Idealism had never attracted Martin, but the exposition it now received
at the hands of Norton was a revelation.  The logical plausibility of it,
that made an appeal to his intellect, seemed missed by Kreis and
Hamilton, who sneered at Norton as a metaphysician, and who, in turn,
sneered back at them as metaphysicians.  Phenomenon and noumenon were
bandied back and forth.  They charged him with attempting to explain
consciousness by itself.  He charged them with word-jugglery, with
reasoning from words to theory instead of from facts to theory.  At this
they were aghast.  It was the cardinal tenet of their mode of reasoning
to start with facts and to give names to the facts.

When Norton wandered into the intricacies of Kant, Kreis reminded him
that all good little German philosophies when they died went to Oxford.  A
little later Norton reminded them of Hamilton's Law of Parsimony, the
application of which they immediately claimed for every reasoning process
of theirs.  And Martin hugged his knees and exulted in it all.  But
Norton was no Spencerian, and he, too, strove for Martin's philosophic
soul, talking as much at him as to his two opponents.

"You know Berkeley has never been answered," he said, looking directly at
Martin.  "Herbert Spencer came the nearest, which was not very near.  Even
the stanchest of Spencer's followers will not go farther.  I was reading
an essay of Saleeby's the other day, and the best Saleeby could say was
that Herbert Spencer _nearly_ succeeded in answering Berkeley."

"You know what Hume said?" Hamilton asked.  Norton nodded, but Hamilton
gave it for the benefit of the rest.  "He said that Berkeley's arguments
admit of no answer and produce no conviction."

"In his, Hume's, mind," was the reply.  "And Hume's mind was the same as
yours, with this difference: he was wise enough to admit there was no
answering Berkeley."

Norton was sensitive and excitable, though he never lost his head, while
Kreis and Hamilton were like a pair of cold-blooded savages, seeking out
tender places to prod and poke.  As the evening grew late, Norton,
smarting under the repeated charges of being a metaphysician, clutching
his chair to keep from jumping to his feet, his gray eyes snapping and
his girlish face grown harsh and sure, made a grand attack upon their
position.

"All right, you Haeckelites, I may reason like a medicine man, but, pray,
how do you reason?  You have nothing to stand on, you unscientific
dogmatists with your positive science which you are always lugging about
into places it has no right to be.  Long before the school of
materialistic monism arose, the ground was removed so that there could be
no foundation.  Locke was the man, John Locke.  Two hundred years
ago--more than that, even in his 'Essay concerning the Human
Understanding,' he proved the non-existence of innate ideas.  The best of
it is that that is precisely what you claim.  To-night, again and again,
you have asserted the non-existence of innate ideas.

"And what does that mean?  It means that you can never know ultimate
reality.  Your brains are empty when you are born.  Appearances, or
phenomena, are all the content your minds can receive from your five
senses.  Then noumena, which are not in your minds when you are born,
have no way of getting in--"

"I deny--" Kreis started to interrupt.

"You wait till I'm done," Norton shouted.  "You can know only that much
of the play and interplay of force and matter as impinges in one way or
another on our senses.  You see, I am willing to admit, for the sake of
the argument, that matter exists; and what I am about to do is to efface
you by your own argument.  I can't do it any other way, for you are both
congenitally unable to understand a philosophic abstraction."

"And now, what do you know of matter, according to your own positive
science?  You know it only by its phenomena, its appearances.  You are
aware only of its changes, or of such changes in it as cause changes in
your consciousness.  Positive science deals only with phenomena, yet you
are foolish enough to strive to be ontologists and to deal with noumena.
Yet, by the very definition of positive science, science is concerned
only with appearances.  As somebody has said, phenomenal knowledge cannot
transcend phenomena."

"You cannot answer Berkeley, even if you have annihilated Kant, and yet,
perforce, you assume that Berkeley is wrong when you affirm that science
proves the non-existence of God, or, as much to the point, the existence
of matter.--You know I granted the reality of matter only in order to
make myself intelligible to your understanding.  Be positive scientists,
if you please; but ontology has no place in positive science, so leave it
alone.  Spencer is right in his agnosticism, but if Spencer--"

But it was time to catch the last ferry-boat for Oakland, and Brissenden
and Martin slipped out, leaving Norton still talking and Kreis and
Hamilton waiting to pounce on him like a pair of hounds as soon as he
finished.

"You have given me a glimpse of fairyland," Martin said on the
ferry-boat.  "It makes life worth while to meet people like that.  My
mind is all worked up.  I never appreciated idealism before.  Yet I can't
accept it.  I know that I shall always be a realist.  I am so made, I
guess.  But I'd like to have made a reply to Kreis and Hamilton, and I
think I'd have had a word or two for Norton.  I didn't see that Spencer
was damaged any.  I'm as excited as a child on its first visit to the
circus.  I see I must read up some more.  I'm going to get hold of
Saleeby.  I still think Spencer is unassailable, and next time I'm going
to take a hand myself."

But Brissenden, breathing painfully, had dropped off to sleep, his chin
buried in a scarf and resting on his sunken chest, his body wrapped in
the long overcoat and shaking to the vibration of the propellers.


