

CHAPTER XXXVII


The first thing Martin did next morning was to go counter both to
Brissenden's advice and command.  "The Shame of the Sun" he wrapped and
mailed to The Acropolis.  He believed he could find magazine publication
for it, and he felt that recognition by the magazines would commend him
to the book-publishing houses.  "Ephemera" he likewise wrapped and mailed
to a magazine.  Despite Brissenden's prejudice against the magazines,
which was a pronounced mania with him, Martin decided that the great poem
should see print.  He did not intend, however, to publish it without the
other's permission.  His plan was to get it accepted by one of the high
magazines, and, thus armed, again to wrestle with Brissenden for consent.

Martin began, that morning, a story which he had sketched out a number of
weeks before and which ever since had been worrying him with its
insistent clamor to be created.  Apparently it was to be a rattling sea
story, a tale of twentieth-century adventure and romance, handling real
characters, in a real world, under real conditions.  But beneath the
swing and go of the story was to be something else--something that the
superficial reader would never discern and which, on the other hand,
would not diminish in any way the interest and enjoyment for such a
reader.  It was this, and not the mere story, that impelled Martin to
write it.  For that matter, it was always the great, universal motif that
suggested plots to him.  After having found such a motif, he cast about
for the particular persons and particular location in time and space
wherewith and wherein to utter the universal thing.  "Overdue" was the
title he had decided for it, and its length he believed would not be more
than sixty thousand words--a bagatelle for him with his splendid vigor of
production.  On this first day he took hold of it with conscious delight
in the mastery of his tools.  He no longer worried for fear that the
sharp, cutting edges should slip and mar his work.  The long months of
intense application and study had brought their reward.  He could now
devote himself with sure hand to the larger phases of the thing he
shaped; and as he worked, hour after hour, he felt, as never before, the
sure and cosmic grasp with which he held life and the affairs of life.
"Overdue" would tell a story that would be true of its particular
characters and its particular events; but it would tell, too, he was
confident, great vital things that would be true of all time, and all
sea, and all life--thanks to Herbert Spencer, he thought, leaning back
for a moment from the table.  Ay, thanks to Herbert Spencer and to the
master-key of life, evolution, which Spencer had placed in his hands.

He was conscious that it was great stuff he was writing.  "It will go!  It
will go!" was the refrain that kept, sounding in his ears.  Of course it
would go.  At last he was turning out the thing at which the magazines
would jump.  The whole story worked out before him in lightning flashes.
He broke off from it long enough to write a paragraph in his note-book.
This would be the last paragraph in "Overdue"; but so thoroughly was the
whole book already composed in his brain that he could write, weeks
before he had arrived at the end, the end itself.  He compared the tale,
as yet unwritten, with the tales of the sea-writers, and he felt it to be
immeasurably superior.  "There's only one man who could touch it," he
murmured aloud, "and that's Conrad.  And it ought to make even him sit up
and shake hands with me, and say, 'Well done, Martin, my boy.'"

He toiled on all day, recollecting, at the last moment, that he was to
have dinner at the Morses'.  Thanks to Brissenden, his black suit was out
of pawn and he was again eligible for dinner parties.  Down town he
stopped off long enough to run into the library and search for Saleeby's
books.  He drew out "The Cycle of Life," and on the car turned to the
essay Norton had mentioned on Spencer.  As Martin read, he grew angry.
His face flushed, his jaw set, and unconsciously his hand clenched,
unclenched, and clenched again as if he were taking fresh grips upon some
hateful thing out of which he was squeezing the life.  When he left the
car, he strode along the sidewalk as a wrathful man will stride, and he
rang the Morse bell with such viciousness that it roused him to
consciousness of his condition, so that he entered in good nature,
smiling with amusement at himself.  No sooner, however, was he inside
than a great depression descended upon him.  He fell from the height
where he had been up-borne all day on the wings of inspiration.
"Bourgeois," "trader's den"--Brissenden's epithets repeated themselves in
his mind.  But what of that? he demanded angrily.  He was marrying Ruth,
not her family.

It seemed to him that he had never seen Ruth more beautiful, more
spiritual and ethereal and at the same time more healthy.  There was
color in her cheeks, and her eyes drew him again and again--the eyes in
which he had first read immortality.  He had forgotten immortality of
late, and the trend of his scientific reading had been away from it; but
here, in Ruth's eyes, he read an argument without words that transcended
all worded arguments.  He saw that in her eyes before which all
discussion fled away, for he saw love there.  And in his own eyes was
love; and love was unanswerable.  Such was his passionate doctrine.

The half hour he had with her, before they went in to dinner, left him
supremely happy and supremely satisfied with life.  Nevertheless, at
table, the inevitable reaction and exhaustion consequent upon the hard
day seized hold of him.  He was aware that his eyes were tired and that
he was irritable.  He remembered it was at this table, at which he now
sneered and was so often bored, that he had first eaten with civilized
beings in what he had imagined was an atmosphere of high culture and
refinement.  He caught a glimpse of that pathetic figure of him, so long
ago, a self-conscious savage, sprouting sweat at every pore in an agony
of apprehension, puzzled by the bewildering minutiae of
eating-implements, tortured by the ogre of a servant, striving at a leap
to live at such dizzy social altitude, and deciding in the end to be
frankly himself, pretending no knowledge and no polish he did not
possess.

He glanced at Ruth for reassurance, much in the same manner that a
passenger, with sudden panic thought of possible shipwreck, will strive
to locate the life preservers.  Well, that much had come out of it--love
and Ruth.  All the rest had failed to stand the test of the books.  But
Ruth and love had stood the test; for them he found a biological
sanction.  Love was the most exalted expression of life.  Nature had been
busy designing him, as she had been busy with all normal men, for the
purpose of loving.  She had spent ten thousand centuries--ay, a hundred
thousand and a million centuries--upon the task, and he was the best she
could do.  She had made love the strongest thing in him, increased its
power a myriad per cent with her gift of imagination, and sent him forth
into the ephemera to thrill and melt and mate.  His hand sought Ruth's
hand beside him hidden by the table, and a warm pressure was given and
received.  She looked at him a swift instant, and her eyes were radiant
and melting.  So were his in the thrill that pervaded him; nor did he
realize how much that was radiant and melting in her eyes had been
aroused by what she had seen in his.

Across the table from him, cater-cornered, at Mr. Morse's right, sat
Judge Blount, a local superior court judge.  Martin had met him a number
of times and had failed to like him.  He and Ruth's father were
discussing labor union politics, the local situation, and socialism, and
Mr. Morse was endeavoring to twit Martin on the latter topic.  At last
Judge Blount looked across the table with benignant and fatherly pity.
Martin smiled to himself.

"You'll grow out of it, young man," he said soothingly.  "Time is the
best cure for such youthful distempers."  He turned to Mr. Morse.  "I do
not believe discussion is good in such cases.  It makes the patient
obstinate."

"That is true," the other assented gravely.  "But it is well to warn the
patient occasionally of his condition."

Martin laughed merrily, but it was with an effort.  The day had been too
long, the day's effort too intense, and he was deep in the throes of the
reaction.

"Undoubtedly you are both excellent doctors," he said; "but if you care a
whit for the opinion of the patient, let him tell you that you are poor
diagnosticians.  In fact, you are both suffering from the disease you
think you find in me.  As for me, I am immune.  The socialist philosophy
that riots half-baked in your veins has passed me by."

"Clever, clever," murmured the judge.  "An excellent ruse in controversy,
to reverse positions."

"Out of your mouth."  Martin's eyes were sparkling, but he kept control
of himself.  "You see, Judge, I've heard your campaign speeches.  By some
henidical process--henidical, by the way is a favorite word of mine which
nobody understands--by some henidical process you persuade yourself that
you believe in the competitive system and the survival of the strong, and
at the same time you indorse with might and main all sorts of measures to
shear the strength from the strong."

"My young man--"

"Remember, I've heard your campaign speeches," Martin warned.  "It's on
record, your position on interstate commerce regulation, on regulation of
the railway trust and Standard Oil, on the conservation of the forests,
on a thousand and one restrictive measures that are nothing else than
socialistic."

"Do you mean to tell me that you do not believe in regulating these
various outrageous exercises of power?"

"That's not the point.  I mean to tell you that you are a poor
diagnostician.  I mean to tell you that I am not suffering from the
microbe of socialism.  I mean to tell you that it is you who are
suffering from the emasculating ravages of that same microbe.  As for me,
I am an inveterate opponent of socialism just as I am an inveterate
opponent of your own mongrel democracy that is nothing else than pseudo-
socialism masquerading under a garb of words that will not stand the test
of the dictionary."

"I am a reactionary--so complete a reactionary that my position is
incomprehensible to you who live in a veiled lie of social organization
and whose sight is not keen enough to pierce the veil.  You make believe
that you believe in the survival of the strong and the rule of the
strong.  I believe.  That is the difference.  When I was a trifle
younger,--a few months younger,--I believed the same thing.  You see, the
ideas of you and yours had impressed me.  But merchants and traders are
cowardly rulers at best; they grunt and grub all their days in the trough
of money-getting, and I have swung back to aristocracy, if you please.  I
am the only individualist in this room.  I look to the state for nothing.
I look only to the strong man, the man on horseback, to save the state
from its own rotten futility."

"Nietzsche was right.  I won't take the time to tell you who Nietzsche
was, but he was right.  The world belongs to the strong--to the strong
who are noble as well and who do not wallow in the swine-trough of trade
and exchange.  The world belongs to the true nobleman, to the great blond
beasts, to the noncompromisers, to the 'yes-sayers.'  And they will eat
you up, you socialists--who are afraid of socialism and who think
yourselves individualists.  Your slave-morality of the meek and lowly
will never save you.--Oh, it's all Greek, I know, and I won't bother you
any more with it.  But remember one thing.  There aren't half a dozen
individualists in Oakland, but Martin Eden is one of them."

He signified that he was done with the discussion, and turned to Ruth.

"I'm wrought up to-day," he said in an undertone.  "All I want to do is
to love, not talk."

He ignored Mr. Morse, who said:-

"I am unconvinced.  All socialists are Jesuits.  That is the way to tell
them."

"We'll make a good Republican out of you yet," said Judge Blount.

"The man on horseback will arrive before that time," Martin retorted with
good humor, and returned to Ruth.

But Mr. Morse was not content.  He did not like the laziness and the
disinclination for sober, legitimate work of this prospective son-in-law
of his, for whose ideas he had no respect and of whose nature he had no
understanding.  So he turned the conversation to Herbert Spencer.  Judge
Blount ably seconded him, and Martin, whose ears had pricked at the first
mention of the philosopher's name, listened to the judge enunciate a
grave and complacent diatribe against Spencer.  From time to time Mr.
Morse glanced at Martin, as much as to say, "There, my boy, you see."

"Chattering daws," Martin muttered under his breath, and went on talking
with Ruth and Arthur.

But the long day and the "real dirt" of the night before were telling
upon him; and, besides, still in his burnt mind was what had made him
angry when he read it on the car.

"What is the matter?" Ruth asked suddenly alarmed by the effort he was
making to contain himself.

"There is no god but the Unknowable, and Herbert Spencer is its prophet,"
Judge Blount was saying at that moment.

Martin turned upon him.

"A cheap judgment," he remarked quietly.  "I heard it first in the City
Hall Park, on the lips of a workingman who ought to have known better.  I
have heard it often since, and each time the clap-trap of it nauseates
me.  You ought to be ashamed of yourself.  To hear that great and noble
man's name upon your lips is like finding a dew-drop in a cesspool.  You
are disgusting."

It was like a thunderbolt.  Judge Blount glared at him with apoplectic
countenance, and silence reigned.  Mr. Morse was secretly pleased.  He
could see that his daughter was shocked.  It was what he wanted to do--to
bring out the innate ruffianism of this man he did not like.

Ruth's hand sought Martin's beseechingly under the table, but his blood
was up.  He was inflamed by the intellectual pretence and fraud of those
who sat in the high places.  A Superior Court Judge!  It was only several
years before that he had looked up from the mire at such glorious
entities and deemed them gods.

Judge Blount recovered himself and attempted to go on, addressing himself
to Martin with an assumption of politeness that the latter understood was
for the benefit of the ladies.  Even this added to his anger.  Was there
no honesty in the world?

"You can't discuss Spencer with me," he cried.  "You do not know any more
about Spencer than do his own countrymen.  But it is no fault of yours, I
grant.  It is just a phase of the contemptible ignorance of the times.  I
ran across a sample of it on my way here this evening.  I was reading an
essay by Saleeby on Spencer.  You should read it.  It is accessible to
all men.  You can buy it in any book-store or draw it from the public
library.  You would feel ashamed of your paucity of abuse and ignorance
of that noble man compared with what Saleeby has collected on the
subject.  It is a record of shame that would shame your shame."

"'The philosopher of the half-educated,' he was called by an academic
Philosopher who was not worthy to pollute the atmosphere he breathed.  I
don't think you have read ten pages of Spencer, but there have been
critics, assumably more intelligent than you, who have read no more than
you of Spencer, who publicly challenged his followers to adduce one
single idea from all his writings--from Herbert Spencer's writings, the
man who has impressed the stamp of his genius over the whole field of
scientific research and modern thought; the father of psychology; the man
who revolutionized pedagogy, so that to-day the child of the French
peasant is taught the three R's according to principles laid down by him.
And the little gnats of men sting his memory when they get their very
bread and butter from the technical application of his ideas.  What
little of worth resides in their brains is largely due to him.  It is
certain that had he never lived, most of what is correct in their parrot-
learned knowledge would be absent."

"And yet a man like Principal Fairbanks of Oxford--a man who sits in an
even higher place than you, Judge Blount--has said that Spencer will be
dismissed by posterity as a poet and dreamer rather than a thinker.
Yappers and blatherskites, the whole brood of them!  '"First Principles"
is not wholly destitute of a certain literary power,' said one of them.
And others of them have said that he was an industrious plodder rather
than an original thinker.  Yappers and blatherskites!  Yappers and
blatherskites!"

Martin ceased abruptly, in a dead silence.  Everybody in Ruth's family
looked up to Judge Blount as a man of power and achievement, and they
were horrified at Martin's outbreak.  The remainder of the dinner passed
like a funeral, the judge and Mr. Morse confining their talk to each
other, and the rest of the conversation being extremely desultory.  Then
afterward, when Ruth and Martin were alone, there was a scene.

"You are unbearable," she wept.

But his anger still smouldered, and he kept muttering, "The beasts!  The
beasts!"

When she averred he had insulted the judge, he retorted:-

"By telling the truth about him?"

"I don't care whether it was true or not," she insisted.  "There are
certain bounds of decency, and you had no license to insult anybody."

"Then where did Judge Blount get the license to assault truth?" Martin
demanded.  "Surely to assault truth is a more serious misdemeanor than to
insult a pygmy personality such as the judge's.  He did worse than that.
He blackened the name of a great, noble man who is dead.  Oh, the beasts!
The beasts!"

His complex anger flamed afresh, and Ruth was in terror of him.  Never
had she seen him so angry, and it was all mystified and unreasonable to
her comprehension.  And yet, through her very terror ran the fibres of
fascination that had drawn and that still drew her to him--that had
compelled her to lean towards him, and, in that mad, culminating moment,
lay her hands upon his neck.  She was hurt and outraged by what had taken
place, and yet she lay in his arms and quivered while he went on
muttering, "The beasts!  The beasts!"  And she still lay there when he
said: "I'll not bother your table again, dear.  They do not like me, and
it is wrong of me to thrust my objectionable presence upon them.  Besides,
they are just as objectionable to me.  Faugh!  They are sickening.  And
to think of it, I dreamed in my innocence that the persons who sat in the
high places, who lived in fine houses and had educations and bank
accounts, were worth while!"


