

CHAPTER XXXVIII


"Come on, let's go down to the local."

So spoke Brissenden, faint from a hemorrhage of half an hour before--the
second hemorrhage in three days.  The perennial whiskey glass was in his
hands, and he drained it with shaking fingers.

"What do I want with socialism?" Martin demanded.

"Outsiders are allowed five-minute speeches," the sick man urged.  "Get
up and spout.  Tell them why you don't want socialism.  Tell them what
you think about them and their ghetto ethics.  Slam Nietzsche into them
and get walloped for your pains.  Make a scrap of it.  It will do them
good.  Discussion is what they want, and what you want, too.  You see,
I'd like to see you a socialist before I'm gone.  It will give you a
sanction for your existence.  It is the one thing that will save you in
the time of disappointment that is coming to you."

"I never can puzzle out why you, of all men, are a socialist," Martin
pondered.  "You detest the crowd so.  Surely there is nothing in the
canaille to recommend it to your aesthetic soul."  He pointed an accusing
finger at the whiskey glass which the other was refilling.  "Socialism
doesn't seem to save you."

"I'm very sick," was the answer.  "With you it is different.  You have
health and much to live for, and you must be handcuffed to life somehow.
As for me, you wonder why I am a socialist.  I'll tell you.  It is
because Socialism is inevitable; because the present rotten and
irrational system cannot endure; because the day is past for your man on
horseback.  The slaves won't stand for it.  They are too many, and willy-
nilly they'll drag down the would-be equestrian before ever he gets
astride.  You can't get away from them, and you'll have to swallow the
whole slave-morality.  It's not a nice mess, I'll allow.  But it's been a-
brewing and swallow it you must.  You are antediluvian anyway, with your
Nietzsche ideas.  The past is past, and the man who says history repeats
itself is a liar.  Of course I don't like the crowd, but what's a poor
chap to do?  We can't have the man on horseback, and anything is
preferable to the timid swine that now rule.  But come on, anyway.  I'm
loaded to the guards now, and if I sit here any longer, I'll get drunk.
And you know the doctor says--damn the doctor!  I'll fool him yet."

It was Sunday night, and they found the small hall packed by the Oakland
socialists, chiefly members of the working class.  The speaker, a clever
Jew, won Martin's admiration at the same time that he aroused his
antagonism.  The man's stooped and narrow shoulders and weazened chest
proclaimed him the true child of the crowded ghetto, and strong on Martin
was the age-long struggle of the feeble, wretched slaves against the
lordly handful of men who had ruled over them and would rule over them to
the end of time.  To Martin this withered wisp of a creature was a
symbol.  He was the figure that stood forth representative of the whole
miserable mass of weaklings and inefficients who perished according to
biological law on the ragged confines of life.  They were the unfit.  In
spite of their cunning philosophy and of their antlike proclivities for
cooperation, Nature rejected them for the exceptional man.  Out of the
plentiful spawn of life she flung from her prolific hand she selected
only the best.  It was by the same method that men, aping her, bred race-
horses and cucumbers.  Doubtless, a creator of a Cosmos could have
devised a better method; but creatures of this particular Cosmos must put
up with this particular method.  Of course, they could squirm as they
perished, as the socialists squirmed, as the speaker on the platform and
the perspiring crowd were squirming even now as they counselled together
for some new device with which to minimize the penalties of living and
outwit the Cosmos.

So Martin thought, and so he spoke when Brissenden urged him to give them
hell.  He obeyed the mandate, walking up to the platform, as was the
custom, and addressing the chairman.  He began in a low voice, haltingly,
forming into order the ideas which had surged in his brain while the Jew
was speaking.  In such meetings five minutes was the time allotted to
each speaker; but when Martin's five minutes were up, he was in full
stride, his attack upon their doctrines but half completed.  He had
caught their interest, and the audience urged the chairman by acclamation
to extend Martin's time.  They appreciated him as a foeman worthy of
their intellect, and they listened intently, following every word.  He
spoke with fire and conviction, mincing no words in his attack upon the
slaves and their morality and tactics and frankly alluding to his hearers
as the slaves in question.  He quoted Spencer and Malthus, and enunciated
the biological law of development.

"And so," he concluded, in a swift resume, "no state composed of the
slave-types can endure.  The old law of development still holds.  In the
struggle for existence, as I have shown, the strong and the progeny of
the strong tend to survive, while the weak and the progeny of the weak
are crushed and tend to perish.  The result is that the strong and the
progeny of the strong survive, and, so long as the struggle obtains, the
strength of each generation increases.  That is development.  But you
slaves--it is too bad to be slaves, I grant--but you slaves dream of a
society where the law of development will be annulled, where no weaklings
and inefficients will perish, where every inefficient will have as much
as he wants to eat as many times a day as he desires, and where all will
marry and have progeny--the weak as well as the strong.  What will be the
result?  No longer will the strength and life-value of each generation
increase.  On the contrary, it will diminish.  There is the Nemesis of
your slave philosophy.  Your society of slaves--of, by, and for,
slaves--must inevitably weaken and go to pieces as the life which
composes it weakens and goes to pieces.

"Remember, I am enunciating biology and not sentimental ethics.  No state
of slaves can stand--"

"How about the United States?" a man yelled from the audience.

"And how about it?" Martin retorted.  "The thirteen colonies threw off
their rulers and formed the Republic so-called.  The slaves were their
own masters.  There were no more masters of the sword.  But you couldn't
get along without masters of some sort, and there arose a new set of
masters--not the great, virile, noble men, but the shrewd and spidery
traders and money-lenders.  And they enslaved you over again--but not
frankly, as the true, noble men would do with weight of their own right
arms, but secretly, by spidery machinations and by wheedling and cajolery
and lies.  They have purchased your slave judges, they have debauched
your slave legislatures, and they have forced to worse horrors than
chattel slavery your slave boys and girls.  Two million of your children
are toiling to-day in this trader-oligarchy of the United States.  Ten
millions of you slaves are not properly sheltered nor properly fed."

"But to return.  I have shown that no society of slaves can endure,
because, in its very nature, such society must annul the law of
development.  No sooner can a slave society be organized than
deterioration sets in.  It is easy for you to talk of annulling the law
of development, but where is the new law of development that will
maintain your strength?  Formulate it.  Is it already formulated?  Then
state it."

Martin took his seat amidst an uproar of voices.  A score of men were on
their feet clamoring for recognition from the chair.  And one by one,
encouraged by vociferous applause, speaking with fire and enthusiasm and
excited gestures, they replied to the attack.  It was a wild night--but
it was wild intellectually, a battle of ideas.  Some strayed from the
point, but most of the speakers replied directly to Martin.  They shook
him with lines of thought that were new to him; and gave him insights,
not into new biological laws, but into new applications of the old laws.
They were too earnest to be always polite, and more than once the
chairman rapped and pounded for order.

It chanced that a cub reporter sat in the audience, detailed there on a
day dull of news and impressed by the urgent need of journalism for
sensation.  He was not a bright cub reporter.  He was merely facile and
glib.  He was too dense to follow the discussion.  In fact, he had a
comfortable feeling that he was vastly superior to these wordy maniacs of
the working class.  Also, he had a great respect for those who sat in the
high places and dictated the policies of nations and newspapers.  Further,
he had an ideal, namely, of achieving that excellence of the perfect
reporter who is able to make something--even a great deal--out of
nothing.

He did not know what all the talk was about.  It was not necessary.  Words
like _revolution_ gave him his cue.  Like a paleontologist, able to
reconstruct an entire skeleton from one fossil bone, he was able to
reconstruct a whole speech from the one word _revolution_.  He did it
that night, and he did it well; and since Martin had made the biggest
stir, he put it all into his mouth and made him the arch-anarch of the
show, transforming his reactionary individualism into the most lurid, red-
shirt socialist utterance.  The cub reporter was an artist, and it was a
large brush with which he laid on the local color--wild-eyed long-haired
men, neurasthenic and degenerate types of men, voices shaken with
passion, clenched fists raised on high, and all projected against a
background of oaths, yells, and the throaty rumbling of angry men.


