

CHAPTER XXXIX


Over the coffee, in his little room, Martin read next morning's paper.  It
was a novel experience to find himself head-lined, on the first page at
that; and he was surprised to learn that he was the most notorious leader
of the Oakland socialists.  He ran over the violent speech the cub
reporter had constructed for him, and, though at first he was angered by
the fabrication, in the end he tossed the paper aside with a laugh.

"Either the man was drunk or criminally malicious," he said that
afternoon, from his perch on the bed, when Brissenden had arrived and
dropped limply into the one chair.

"But what do you care?" Brissenden asked.  "Surely you don't desire the
approval of the bourgeois swine that read the newspapers?"

Martin thought for a while, then said:-

"No, I really don't care for their approval, not a whit.  On the other
hand, it's very likely to make my relations with Ruth's family a trifle
awkward.  Her father always contended I was a socialist, and this
miserable stuff will clinch his belief.  Not that I care for his
opinion--but what's the odds?  I want to read you what I've been doing to-
day.  It's 'Overdue,' of course, and I'm just about halfway through."

He was reading aloud when Maria thrust open the door and ushered in a
young man in a natty suit who glanced briskly about him, noting the oil-
burner and the kitchen in the corner before his gaze wandered on to
Martin.

"Sit down," Brissenden said.

Martin made room for the young man on the bed and waited for him to
broach his business.

"I heard you speak last night, Mr. Eden, and I've come to interview you,"
he began.

Brissenden burst out in a hearty laugh.

"A brother socialist?" the reporter asked, with a quick glance at
Brissenden that appraised the color-value of that cadaverous and dying
man.

"And he wrote that report," Martin said softly.  "Why, he is only a boy!"

"Why don't you poke him?" Brissenden asked.  "I'd give a thousand dollars
to have my lungs back for five minutes."

The cub reporter was a trifle perplexed by this talking over him and
around him and at him.  But he had been commended for his brilliant
description of the socialist meeting and had further been detailed to get
a personal interview with Martin Eden, the leader of the organized menace
to society.

"You do not object to having your picture taken, Mr. Eden?" he said.
"I've a staff photographer outside, you see, and he says it will be
better to take you right away before the sun gets lower.  Then we can
have the interview afterward."

"A photographer," Brissenden said meditatively.  "Poke him, Martin!  Poke
him!"

"I guess I'm getting old," was the answer.  "I know I ought, but I really
haven't the heart.  It doesn't seem to matter."

"For his mother's sake," Brissenden urged.

"It's worth considering," Martin replied; "but it doesn't seem worth
while enough to rouse sufficient energy in me.  You see, it does take
energy to give a fellow a poking.  Besides, what does it matter?"

"That's right--that's the way to take it," the cub announced airily,
though he had already begun to glance anxiously at the door.

"But it wasn't true, not a word of what he wrote," Martin went on,
confining his attention to Brissenden.

"It was just in a general way a description, you understand," the cub
ventured, "and besides, it's good advertising.  That's what counts.  It
was a favor to you."

"It's good advertising, Martin, old boy," Brissenden repeated solemnly.

"And it was a favor to me--think of that!" was Martin's contribution.

"Let me see--where were you born, Mr. Eden?" the cub asked, assuming an
air of expectant attention.

"He doesn't take notes," said Brissenden.  "He remembers it all."

"That is sufficient for me."  The cub was trying not to look worried.  "No
decent reporter needs to bother with notes."

"That was sufficient--for last night."  But Brissenden was not a disciple
of quietism, and he changed his attitude abruptly.  "Martin, if you don't
poke him, I'll do it myself, if I fall dead on the floor the next
moment."

"How will a spanking do?" Martin asked.

Brissenden considered judicially, and nodded his head.

The next instant Martin was seated on the edge of the bed with the cub
face downward across his knees.

"Now don't bite," Martin warned, "or else I'll have to punch your face.
It would be a pity, for it is such a pretty face."

His uplifted hand descended, and thereafter rose and fell in a swift and
steady rhythm.  The cub struggled and cursed and squirmed, but did not
offer to bite.  Brissenden looked on gravely, though once he grew excited
and gripped the whiskey bottle, pleading, "Here, just let me swat him
once."

"Sorry my hand played out," Martin said, when at last he desisted.  "It
is quite numb."

He uprighted the cub and perched him on the bed.

"I'll have you arrested for this," he snarled, tears of boyish
indignation running down his flushed cheeks.  "I'll make you sweat for
this.  You'll see."

"The pretty thing," Martin remarked.  "He doesn't realize that he has
entered upon the downward path.  It is not honest, it is not square, it
is not manly, to tell lies about one's fellow-creatures the way he has
done, and he doesn't know it."

"He has to come to us to be told," Brissenden filled in a pause.

"Yes, to me whom he has maligned and injured.  My grocery will
undoubtedly refuse me credit now.  The worst of it is that the poor boy
will keep on this way until he deteriorates into a first-class newspaper
man and also a first-class scoundrel."

"But there is yet time," quoth Brissenden.  "Who knows but what you may
prove the humble instrument to save him.  Why didn't you let me swat him
just once?  I'd like to have had a hand in it."

"I'll have you arrested, the pair of you, you b-b-big brutes," sobbed the
erring soul.

"No, his mouth is too pretty and too weak."  Martin shook his head
lugubriously.  "I'm afraid I've numbed my hand in vain.  The young man
cannot reform.  He will become eventually a very great and successful
newspaper man.  He has no conscience.  That alone will make him great."

With that the cub passed out the door in trepidation to the last for fear
that Brissenden would hit him in the back with the bottle he still
clutched.

In the next morning's paper Martin learned a great deal more about
himself that was new to him.  "We are the sworn enemies of society," he
found himself quoted as saying in a column interview.  "No, we are not
anarchists but socialists."  When the reporter pointed out to him that
there seemed little difference between the two schools, Martin had
shrugged his shoulders in silent affirmation.  His face was described as
bilaterally asymmetrical, and various other signs of degeneration were
described.  Especially notable were his thuglike hands and the fiery
gleams in his blood-shot eyes.

He learned, also, that he spoke nightly to the workmen in the City Hall
Park, and that among the anarchists and agitators that there inflamed the
minds of the people he drew the largest audiences and made the most
revolutionary speeches.  The cub painted a high-light picture of his poor
little room, its oil-stove and the one chair, and of the death's-head
tramp who kept him company and who looked as if he had just emerged from
twenty years of solitary confinement in some fortress dungeon.

The cub had been industrious.  He had scurried around and nosed out
Martin's family history, and procured a photograph of Higginbotham's Cash
Store with Bernard Higginbotham himself standing out in front.  That
gentleman was depicted as an intelligent, dignified businessman who had
no patience with his brother-in-law's socialistic views, and no patience
with the brother-in-law, either, whom he was quoted as characterizing as
a lazy good-for-nothing who wouldn't take a job when it was offered to
him and who would go to jail yet.  Hermann Von Schmidt, Marian's husband,
had likewise been interviewed.  He had called Martin the black sheep of
the family and repudiated him.  "He tried to sponge off of me, but I put
a stop to that good and quick," Von Schmidt had said to the reporter.  "He
knows better than to come bumming around here.  A man who won't work is
no good, take that from me."

This time Martin was genuinely angry.  Brissenden looked upon the affair
as a good joke, but he could not console Martin, who knew that it would
be no easy task to explain to Ruth.  As for her father, he knew that he
must be overjoyed with what had happened and that he would make the most
of it to break off the engagement.  How much he would make of it he was
soon to realize.  The afternoon mail brought a letter from Ruth.  Martin
opened it with a premonition of disaster, and read it standing at the
open door when he had received it from the postman.  As he read,
mechanically his hand sought his pocket for the tobacco and brown paper
of his old cigarette days.  He was not aware that the pocket was empty or
that he had even reached for the materials with which to roll a
cigarette.

It was not a passionate letter.  There were no touches of anger in it.
But all the way through, from the first sentence to the last, was sounded
the note of hurt and disappointment.  She had expected better of him.  She
had thought he had got over his youthful wildness, that her love for him
had been sufficiently worth while to enable him to live seriously and
decently.  And now her father and mother had taken a firm stand and
commanded that the engagement be broken.  That they were justified in
this she could not but admit.  Their relation could never be a happy one.
It had been unfortunate from the first.  But one regret she voiced in the
whole letter, and it was a bitter one to Martin.  "If only you had
settled down to some position and attempted to make something of
yourself," she wrote.  "But it was not to be.  Your past life had been
too wild and irregular.  I can understand that you are not to be blamed.
You could act only according to your nature and your early training.  So
I do not blame you, Martin.  Please remember that.  It was simply a
mistake.  As father and mother have contended, we were not made for each
other, and we should both be happy because it was discovered not too
late." . . "There is no use trying to see me," she said toward the last.
"It would be an unhappy meeting for both of us, as well as for my mother.
I feel, as it is, that I have caused her great pain and worry.  I shall
have to do much living to atone for it."

He read it through to the end, carefully, a second time, then sat down
and replied.  He outlined the remarks he had uttered at the socialist
meeting, pointing out that they were in all ways the converse of what the
newspaper had put in his mouth.  Toward the end of the letter he was
God's own lover pleading passionately for love.  "Please answer," he
said, "and in your answer you have to tell me but one thing.  Do you love
me?  That is all--the answer to that one question."

But no answer came the next day, nor the next.  "Overdue" lay untouched
upon the table, and each day the heap of returned manuscripts under the
table grew larger.  For the first time Martin's glorious sleep was
interrupted by insomnia, and he tossed through long, restless nights.
Three times he called at the Morse home, but was turned away by the
servant who answered the bell.  Brissenden lay sick in his hotel, too
feeble to stir out, and, though Martin was with him often, he did not
worry him with his troubles.

For Martin's troubles were many.  The aftermath of the cub reporter's
deed was even wider than Martin had anticipated.  The Portuguese grocer
refused him further credit, while the greengrocer, who was an American
and proud of it, had called him a traitor to his country and refused
further dealings with him--carrying his patriotism to such a degree that
he cancelled Martin's account and forbade him ever to attempt to pay it.
The talk in the neighborhood reflected the same feeling, and indignation
against Martin ran high.  No one would have anything to do with a
socialist traitor.  Poor Maria was dubious and frightened, but she
remained loyal.  The children of the neighborhood recovered from the awe
of the grand carriage which once had visited Martin, and from safe
distances they called him "hobo" and "bum."  The Silva tribe, however,
stanchly defended him, fighting more than one pitched battle for his
honor, and black eyes and bloody noses became quite the order of the day
and added to Maria's perplexities and troubles.

Once, Martin met Gertrude on the street, down in Oakland, and learned
what he knew could not be otherwise--that Bernard Higginbotham was
furious with him for having dragged the family into public disgrace, and
that he had forbidden him the house.

"Why don't you go away, Martin?" Gertrude had begged.  "Go away and get a
job somewhere and steady down.  Afterwards, when this all blows over, you
can come back."

Martin shook his head, but gave no explanations.  How could he explain?
He was appalled at the awful intellectual chasm that yawned between him
and his people.  He could never cross it and explain to them his
position,--the Nietzschean position, in regard to socialism.  There were
not words enough in the English language, nor in any language, to make
his attitude and conduct intelligible to them.  Their highest concept of
right conduct, in his case, was to get a job.  That was their first word
and their last.  It constituted their whole lexicon of ideas.  Get a job!
Go to work!  Poor, stupid slaves, he thought, while his sister talked.
Small wonder the world belonged to the strong.  The slaves were obsessed
by their own slavery.  A job was to them a golden fetich before which
they fell down and worshipped.

He shook his head again, when Gertrude offered him money, though he knew
that within the day he would have to make a trip to the pawnbroker.

"Don't come near Bernard now," she admonished him.  "After a few months,
when he is cooled down, if you want to, you can get the job of drivin'
delivery-wagon for him.  Any time you want me, just send for me an' I'll
come.  Don't forget."

She went away weeping audibly, and he felt a pang of sorrow shoot through
him at sight of her heavy body and uncouth gait.  As he watched her go,
the Nietzschean edifice seemed to shake and totter.  The slave-class in
the abstract was all very well, but it was not wholly satisfactory when
it was brought home to his own family.  And yet, if there was ever a
slave trampled by the strong, that slave was his sister Gertrude.  He
grinned savagely at the paradox.  A fine Nietzsche-man he was, to allow
his intellectual concepts to be shaken by the first sentiment or emotion
that strayed along--ay, to be shaken by the slave-morality itself, for
that was what his pity for his sister really was.  The true noble men
were above pity and compassion.  Pity and compassion had been generated
in the subterranean barracoons of the slaves and were no more than the
agony and sweat of the crowded miserables and weaklings.


