

CHAPTER XL


"Overdue" still continued to lie forgotten on the table.  Every
manuscript that he had had out now lay under the table.  Only one
manuscript he kept going, and that was Brissenden's "Ephemera."  His
bicycle and black suit were again in pawn, and the type-writer people
were once more worrying about the rent.  But such things no longer
bothered him.  He was seeking a new orientation, and until that was found
his life must stand still.

After several weeks, what he had been waiting for happened.  He met Ruth
on the street.  It was true, she was accompanied by her brother, Norman,
and it was true that they tried to ignore him and that Norman attempted
to wave him aside.

"If you interfere with my sister, I'll call an officer," Norman
threatened.  "She does not wish to speak with you, and your insistence is
insult."

"If you persist, you'll have to call that officer, and then you'll get
your name in the papers," Martin answered grimly.  "And now, get out of
my way and get the officer if you want to.  I'm going to talk with Ruth."

"I want to have it from your own lips," he said to her.

She was pale and trembling, but she held up and looked inquiringly.

"The question I asked in my letter," he prompted.

Norman made an impatient movement, but Martin checked him with a swift
look.

She shook her head.

"Is all this of your own free will?" he demanded.

"It is."  She spoke in a low, firm voice and with deliberation.  "It is
of my own free will.  You have disgraced me so that I am ashamed to meet
my friends.  They are all talking about me, I know.  That is all I can
tell you.  You have made me very unhappy, and I never wish to see you
again."

"Friends!  Gossip!  Newspaper misreports!  Surely such things are not
stronger than love!  I can only believe that you never loved me."

A blush drove the pallor from her face.

"After what has passed?" she said faintly.  "Martin, you do not know what
you are saying.  I am not common."

"You see, she doesn't want to have anything to do with you," Norman
blurted out, starting on with her.

Martin stood aside and let them pass, fumbling unconsciously in his coat
pocket for the tobacco and brown papers that were not there.

It was a long walk to North Oakland, but it was not until he went up the
steps and entered his room that he knew he had walked it.  He found
himself sitting on the edge of the bed and staring about him like an
awakened somnambulist.  He noticed "Overdue" lying on the table and drew
up his chair and reached for his pen.  There was in his nature a logical
compulsion toward completeness.  Here was something undone.  It had been
deferred against the completion of something else.  Now that something
else had been finished, and he would apply himself to this task until it
was finished.  What he would do next he did not know.  All that he did
know was that a climacteric in his life had been attained.  A period had
been reached, and he was rounding it off in workman-like fashion.  He was
not curious about the future.  He would soon enough find out what it held
in store for him.  Whatever it was, it did not matter.  Nothing seemed to
matter.

For five days he toiled on at "Overdue," going nowhere, seeing nobody,
and eating meagrely.  On the morning of the sixth day the postman brought
him a thin letter from the editor of The Parthenon.  A glance told him
that "Ephemera" was accepted.  "We have submitted the poem to Mr.
Cartwright Bruce," the editor went on to say, "and he has reported so
favorably upon it that we cannot let it go.  As an earnest of our
pleasure in publishing the poem, let me tell you that we have set it for
the August number, our July number being already made up.  Kindly extend
our pleasure and our thanks to Mr. Brissenden.  Please send by return
mail his photograph and biographical data.  If our honorarium is
unsatisfactory, kindly telegraph us at once and state what you consider a
fair price."

Since the honorarium they had offered was three hundred and fifty
dollars, Martin thought it not worth while to telegraph.  Then, too,
there was Brissenden's consent to be gained.  Well, he had been right,
after all.  Here was one magazine editor who knew real poetry when he saw
it.  And the price was splendid, even though it was for the poem of a
century.  As for Cartwright Bruce, Martin knew that he was the one critic
for whose opinions Brissenden had any respect.

Martin rode down town on an electric car, and as he watched the houses
and cross-streets slipping by he was aware of a regret that he was not
more elated over his friend's success and over his own signal victory.
The one critic in the United States had pronounced favorably on the poem,
while his own contention that good stuff could find its way into the
magazines had proved correct.  But enthusiasm had lost its spring in him,
and he found that he was more anxious to see Brissenden than he was to
carry the good news.  The acceptance of The Parthenon had recalled to him
that during his five days' devotion to "Overdue" he had not heard from
Brissenden nor even thought about him.  For the first time Martin
realized the daze he had been in, and he felt shame for having forgotten
his friend.  But even the shame did not burn very sharply.  He was numb
to emotions of any sort save the artistic ones concerned in the writing
of "Overdue."  So far as other affairs were concerned, he had been in a
trance.  For that matter, he was still in a trance.  All this life
through which the electric car whirred seemed remote and unreal, and he
would have experienced little interest and less shock if the great stone
steeple of the church he passed had suddenly crumbled to mortar-dust upon
his head.

At the hotel he hurried up to Brissenden's room, and hurried down again.
The room was empty.  All luggage was gone.

"Did Mr. Brissenden leave any address?" he asked the clerk, who looked at
him curiously for a moment.

"Haven't you heard?" he asked.

Martin shook his head.

"Why, the papers were full of it.  He was found dead in bed.  Suicide.
Shot himself through the head."

"Is he buried yet?" Martin seemed to hear his voice, like some one else's
voice, from a long way off, asking the question.

"No.  The body was shipped East after the inquest.  Lawyers engaged by
his people saw to the arrangements."

"They were quick about it, I must say," Martin commented.

"Oh, I don't know.  It happened five days ago."

"Five days ago?"

"Yes, five days ago."

"Oh," Martin said as he turned and went out.

At the corner he stepped into the Western Union and sent a telegram to
The Parthenon, advising them to proceed with the publication of the poem.
He had in his pocket but five cents with which to pay his carfare home,
so he sent the message collect.

Once in his room, he resumed his writing.  The days and nights came and
went, and he sat at his table and wrote on.  He went nowhere, save to the
pawnbroker, took no exercise, and ate methodically when he was hungry and
had something to cook, and just as methodically went without when he had
nothing to cook.  Composed as the story was, in advance, chapter by
chapter, he nevertheless saw and developed an opening that increased the
power of it, though it necessitated twenty thousand additional words.  It
was not that there was any vital need that the thing should be well done,
but that his artistic canons compelled him to do it well.  He worked on
in the daze, strangely detached from the world around him, feeling like a
familiar ghost among these literary trappings of his former life.  He
remembered that some one had said that a ghost was the spirit of a man
who was dead and who did not have sense enough to know it; and he paused
for the moment to wonder if he were really dead and unaware of it.

Came the day when "Overdue" was finished.  The agent of the type-writer
firm had come for the machine, and he sat on the bed while Martin, on the
one chair, typed the last pages of the final chapter.  "Finis," he wrote,
in capitals, at the end, and to him it was indeed finis.  He watched the
type-writer carried out the door with a feeling of relief, then went over
and lay down on the bed.  He was faint from hunger.  Food had not passed
his lips in thirty-six hours, but he did not think about it.  He lay on
his back, with closed eyes, and did not think at all, while the daze or
stupor slowly welled up, saturating his consciousness.  Half in delirium,
he began muttering aloud the lines of an anonymous poem Brissenden had
been fond of quoting to him.  Maria, listening anxiously outside his
door, was perturbed by his monotonous utterance.  The words in themselves
were not significant to her, but the fact that he was saying them was.  "I
have done," was the burden of the poem.

   "'I have done--
   Put by the lute.
   Song and singing soon are over
   As the airy shades that hover
   In among the purple clover.
   I have done--
   Put by the lute.
   Once I sang as early thrushes
   Sing among the dewy bushes;
   Now I'm mute.
   I am like a weary linnet,
   For my throat has no song in it;
   I have had my singing minute.
   I have done.
   Put by the lute.'"

Maria could stand it no longer, and hurried away to the stove, where she
filled a quart-bowl with soup, putting into it the lion's share of
chopped meat and vegetables which her ladle scraped from the bottom of
the pot.  Martin roused himself and sat up and began to eat, between
spoonfuls reassuring Maria that he had not been talking in his sleep and
that he did not have any fever.

After she left him he sat drearily, with drooping shoulders, on the edge
of the bed, gazing about him with lack-lustre eyes that saw nothing until
the torn wrapper of a magazine, which had come in the morning's mail and
which lay unopened, shot a gleam of light into his darkened brain.  It is
The Parthenon, he thought, the August Parthenon, and it must contain
"Ephemera."  If only Brissenden were here to see!

He was turning the pages of the magazine, when suddenly he stopped.
"Ephemera" had been featured, with gorgeous head-piece and Beardsley-like
margin decorations.  On one side of the head-piece was Brissenden's
photograph, on the other side was the photograph of Sir John Value, the
British Ambassador.  A preliminary editorial note quoted Sir John Value
as saying that there were no poets in America, and the publication of
"Ephemera" was The Parthenon's.  "There, take that, Sir John Value!"
Cartwright Bruce was described as the greatest critic in America, and he
was quoted as saying that "Ephemera" was the greatest poem ever written
in America.  And finally, the editor's foreword ended with: "We have not
yet made up our minds entirely as to the merits of "Ephemera"; perhaps we
shall never be able to do so.  But we have read it often, wondering at
the words and their arrangement, wondering where Mr. Brissenden got them,
and how he could fasten them together."  Then followed the poem.

"Pretty good thing you died, Briss, old man," Martin murmured, letting
the magazine slip between his knees to the floor.

The cheapness and vulgarity of it was nauseating, and Martin noted
apathetically that he was not nauseated very much.  He wished he could
get angry, but did not have energy enough to try.  He was too numb.  His
blood was too congealed to accelerate to the swift tidal flow of
indignation.  After all, what did it matter?  It was on a par with all
the rest that Brissenden had condemned in bourgeois society.

"Poor Briss," Martin communed; "he would never have forgiven me."

Rousing himself with an effort, he possessed himself of a box which had
once contained type-writer paper.  Going through its contents, he drew
forth eleven poems which his friend had written.  These he tore
lengthwise and crosswise and dropped into the waste basket.  He did it
languidly, and, when he had finished, sat on the edge of the bed staring
blankly before him.

How long he sat there he did not know, until, suddenly, across his
sightless vision he saw form a long horizontal line of white.  It was
curious.  But as he watched it grow in definiteness he saw that it was a
coral reef smoking in the white Pacific surges.  Next, in the line of
breakers he made out a small canoe, an outrigger canoe.  In the stern he
saw a young bronzed god in scarlet hip-cloth dipping a flashing paddle.
He recognized him.  He was Moti, the youngest son of Tati, the chief, and
this was Tahiti, and beyond that smoking reef lay the sweet land of
Papara and the chief's grass house by the river's mouth.  It was the end
of the day, and Moti was coming home from the fishing.  He was waiting
for the rush of a big breaker whereon to jump the reef.  Then he saw
himself, sitting forward in the canoe as he had often sat in the past,
dipping a paddle that waited Moti's word to dig in like mad when the
turquoise wall of the great breaker rose behind them.  Next, he was no
longer an onlooker but was himself in the canoe, Moti was crying out,
they were both thrusting hard with their paddles, racing on the steep
face of the flying turquoise.  Under the bow the water was hissing as
from a steam jet, the air was filled with driven spray, there was a rush
and rumble and long-echoing roar, and the canoe floated on the placid
water of the lagoon.  Moti laughed and shook the salt water from his
eyes, and together they paddled in to the pounded-coral beach where
Tati's grass walls through the cocoanut-palms showed golden in the
setting sun.

The picture faded, and before his eyes stretched the disorder of his
squalid room.  He strove in vain to see Tahiti again.  He knew there was
singing among the trees and that the maidens were dancing in the
moonlight, but he could not see them.  He could see only the littered
writing-table, the empty space where the type-writer had stood, and the
unwashed window-pane.  He closed his eyes with a groan, and slept.


