

CHAPTER XLI


He slept heavily all night, and did not stir until aroused by the postman
on his morning round.  Martin felt tired and passive, and went through
his letters aimlessly.  One thin envelope, from a robber magazine,
contained for twenty-two dollars.  He had been dunning for it for a year
and a half.  He noted its amount apathetically.  The old-time thrill at
receiving a publisher's check was gone.  Unlike his earlier checks, this
one was not pregnant with promise of great things to come.  To him it was
a check for twenty-two dollars, that was all, and it would buy him
something to eat.

Another check was in the same mail, sent from a New York weekly in
payment for some humorous verse which had been accepted months before.  It
was for ten dollars.  An idea came to him, which he calmly considered.  He
did not know what he was going to do, and he felt in no hurry to do
anything.  In the meantime he must live.  Also he owed numerous debts.
Would it not be a paying investment to put stamps on the huge pile of
manuscripts under the table and start them on their travels again?  One
or two of them might be accepted.  That would help him to live.  He
decided on the investment, and, after he had cashed the checks at the
bank down in Oakland, he bought ten dollars' worth of postage stamps.  The
thought of going home to cook breakfast in his stuffy little room was
repulsive to him.  For the first time he refused to consider his debts.
He knew that in his room he could manufacture a substantial breakfast at
a cost of from fifteen to twenty cents.  But, instead, he went into the
Forum Cafe and ordered a breakfast that cost two dollars.  He tipped the
waiter a quarter, and spent fifty cents for a package of Egyptian
cigarettes.  It was the first time he had smoked since Ruth had asked him
to stop.  But he could see now no reason why he should not, and besides,
he wanted to smoke.  And what did the money matter?  For five cents he
could have bought a package of Durham and brown papers and rolled forty
cigarettes--but what of it?  Money had no meaning to him now except what
it would immediately buy.  He was chartless and rudderless, and he had no
port to make, while drifting involved the least living, and it was living
that hurt.

The days slipped along, and he slept eight hours regularly every night.
Though now, while waiting for more checks, he ate in the Japanese
restaurants where meals were served for ten cents, his wasted body filled
out, as did the hollows in his cheeks.  He no longer abused himself with
short sleep, overwork, and overstudy.  He wrote nothing, and the books
were closed.  He walked much, out in the hills, and loafed long hours in
the quiet parks.  He had no friends nor acquaintances, nor did he make
any.  He had no inclination.  He was waiting for some impulse, from he
knew not where, to put his stopped life into motion again.  In the
meantime his life remained run down, planless, and empty and idle.

Once he made a trip to San Francisco to look up the "real dirt."  But at
the last moment, as he stepped into the upstairs entrance, he recoiled
and turned and fled through the swarming ghetto.  He was frightened at
the thought of hearing philosophy discussed, and he fled furtively, for
fear that some one of the "real dirt" might chance along and recognize
him.

Sometimes he glanced over the magazines and newspapers to see how
"Ephemera" was being maltreated.  It had made a hit.  But what a hit!
Everybody had read it, and everybody was discussing whether or not it was
really poetry.  The local papers had taken it up, and daily there
appeared columns of learned criticisms, facetious editorials, and serious
letters from subscribers.  Helen Della Delmar (proclaimed with a flourish
of trumpets and rolling of tomtoms to be the greatest woman poet in the
United States) denied Brissenden a seat beside her on Pegasus and wrote
voluminous letters to the public, proving that he was no poet.

The Parthenon came out in its next number patting itself on the back for
the stir it had made, sneering at Sir John Value, and exploiting
Brissenden's death with ruthless commercialism.  A newspaper with a sworn
circulation of half a million published an original and spontaneous poem
by Helen Della Delmar, in which she gibed and sneered at Brissenden.
Also, she was guilty of a second poem, in which she parodied him.

Martin had many times to be glad that Brissenden was dead.  He had hated
the crowd so, and here all that was finest and most sacred of him had
been thrown to the crowd.  Daily the vivisection of Beauty went on.  Every
nincompoop in the land rushed into free print, floating their wizened
little egos into the public eye on the surge of Brissenden's greatness.
Quoth one paper: "We have received a letter from a gentleman who wrote a
poem just like it, only better, some time ago."  Another paper, in deadly
seriousness, reproving Helen Della Delmar for her parody, said: "But
unquestionably Miss Delmar wrote it in a moment of badinage and not quite
with the respect that one great poet should show to another and perhaps
to the greatest.  However, whether Miss Delmar be jealous or not of the
man who invented 'Ephemera,' it is certain that she, like thousands of
others, is fascinated by his work, and that the day may come when she
will try to write lines like his."

Ministers began to preach sermons against "Ephemera," and one, who too
stoutly stood for much of its content, was expelled for heresy.  The
great poem contributed to the gayety of the world.  The comic
verse-writers and the cartoonists took hold of it with screaming
laughter, and in the personal columns of society weeklies jokes were
perpetrated on it to the effect that Charley Frensham told Archie
Jennings, in confidence, that five lines of "Ephemera" would drive a man
to beat a cripple, and that ten lines would send him to the bottom of the
river.

Martin did not laugh; nor did he grit his teeth in anger.  The effect
produced upon him was one of great sadness.  In the crash of his whole
world, with love on the pinnacle, the crash of magazinedom and the dear
public was a small crash indeed.  Brissenden had been wholly right in his
judgment of the magazines, and he, Martin, had spent arduous and futile
years in order to find it out for himself.  The magazines were all
Brissenden had said they were and more.  Well, he was done, he solaced
himself.  He had hitched his wagon to a star and been landed in a
pestiferous marsh.  The visions of Tahiti--clean, sweet Tahiti--were
coming to him more frequently.  And there were the low Paumotus, and the
high Marquesas; he saw himself often, now, on board trading schooners or
frail little cutters, slipping out at dawn through the reef at Papeete
and beginning the long beat through the pearl-atolls to Nukahiva and the
Bay of Taiohae, where Tamari, he knew, would kill a pig in honor of his
coming, and where Tamari's flower-garlanded daughters would seize his
hands and with song and laughter garland him with flowers.  The South
Seas were calling, and he knew that sooner or later he would answer the
call.

In the meantime he drifted, resting and recuperating after the long
traverse he had made through the realm of knowledge.  When The Parthenon
check of three hundred and fifty dollars was forwarded to him, he turned
it over to the local lawyer who had attended to Brissenden's affairs for
his family.  Martin took a receipt for the check, and at the same time
gave a note for the hundred dollars Brissenden had let him have.

The time was not long when Martin ceased patronizing the Japanese
restaurants.  At the very moment when he had abandoned the fight, the
tide turned.  But it had turned too late.  Without a thrill he opened a
thick envelope from The Millennium, scanned the face of a check that
represented three hundred dollars, and noted that it was the payment on
acceptance for "Adventure."  Every debt he owed in the world, including
the pawnshop, with its usurious interest, amounted to less than a hundred
dollars.  And when he had paid everything, and lifted the hundred-dollar
note with Brissenden's lawyer, he still had over a hundred dollars in
pocket.  He ordered a suit of clothes from the tailor and ate his meals
in the best cafes in town.  He still slept in his little room at Maria's,
but the sight of his new clothes caused the neighborhood children to
cease from calling him "hobo" and "tramp" from the roofs of woodsheds and
over back fences.

"Wiki-Wiki," his Hawaiian short story, was bought by Warren's Monthly for
two hundred and fifty dollars.  The Northern Review took his essay, "The
Cradle of Beauty," and Mackintosh's Magazine took "The Palmist"--the poem
he had written to Marian.  The editors and readers were back from their
summer vacations, and manuscripts were being handled quickly.  But Martin
could not puzzle out what strange whim animated them to this general
acceptance of the things they had persistently rejected for two years.
Nothing of his had been published.  He was not known anywhere outside of
Oakland, and in Oakland, with the few who thought they knew him, he was
notorious as a red-shirt and a socialist.  So there was no explaining
this sudden acceptability of his wares.  It was sheer jugglery of fate.

After it had been refused by a number of magazines, he had taken
Brissenden's rejected advice and started, "The Shame of the Sun" on the
round of publishers.  After several refusals, Singletree, Darnley & Co.
accepted it, promising fall publication.  When Martin asked for an
advance on royalties, they wrote that such was not their custom, that
books of that nature rarely paid for themselves, and that they doubted if
his book would sell a thousand copies.  Martin figured what the book
would earn him on such a sale.  Retailed at a dollar, on a royalty of
fifteen per cent, it would bring him one hundred and fifty dollars.  He
decided that if he had it to do over again he would confine himself to
fiction.  "Adventure," one-fourth as long, had brought him twice as much
from The Millennium.  That newspaper paragraph he had read so long ago
had been true, after all.  The first-class magazines did not pay on
acceptance, and they paid well.  Not two cents a word, but four cents a
word, had The Millennium paid him.  And, furthermore, they bought good
stuff, too, for were they not buying his?  This last thought he
accompanied with a grin.

He wrote to Singletree, Darnley & Co., offering to sell out his rights in
"The Shame of the Sun" for a hundred dollars, but they did not care to
take the risk.  In the meantime he was not in need of money, for several
of his later stories had been accepted and paid for.  He actually opened
a bank account, where, without a debt in the world, he had several
hundred dollars to his credit.  "Overdue," after having been declined by
a number of magazines, came to rest at the Meredith-Lowell Company.
Martin remembered the five dollars Gertrude had given him, and his
resolve to return it to her a hundred times over; so he wrote for an
advance on royalties of five hundred dollars.  To his surprise a check
for that amount, accompanied by a contract, came by return mail.  He
cashed the check into five-dollar gold pieces and telephoned Gertrude
that he wanted to see her.

She arrived at the house panting and short of breath from the haste she
had made.  Apprehensive of trouble, she had stuffed the few dollars she
possessed into her hand-satchel; and so sure was she that disaster had
overtaken her brother, that she stumbled forward, sobbing, into his arms,
at the same time thrusting the satchel mutely at him.

"I'd have come myself," he said.  "But I didn't want a row with Mr.
Higginbotham, and that is what would have surely happened."

"He'll be all right after a time," she assured him, while she wondered
what the trouble was that Martin was in.  "But you'd best get a job first
an' steady down.  Bernard does like to see a man at honest work.  That
stuff in the newspapers broke 'm all up.  I never saw 'm so mad before."

"I'm not going to get a job," Martin said with a smile.  "And you can
tell him so from me.  I don't need a job, and there's the proof of it."

He emptied the hundred gold pieces into her lap in a glinting, tinkling
stream.

"You remember that fiver you gave me the time I didn't have carfare?
Well, there it is, with ninety-nine brothers of different ages but all of
the same size."

If Gertrude had been frightened when she arrived, she was now in a panic
of fear.  Her fear was such that it was certitude.  She was not
suspicious.  She was convinced.  She looked at Martin in horror, and her
heavy limbs shrank under the golden stream as though it were burning her.

"It's yours," he laughed.

She burst into tears, and began to moan, "My poor boy, my poor boy!"

He was puzzled for a moment.  Then he divined the cause of her agitation
and handed her the Meredith-Lowell letter which had accompanied the
check.  She stumbled through it, pausing now and again to wipe her eyes,
and when she had finished, said:-

"An' does it mean that you come by the money honestly?"

"More honestly than if I'd won it in a lottery.  I earned it."

Slowly faith came back to her, and she reread the letter carefully.  It
took him long to explain to her the nature of the transaction which had
put the money into his possession, and longer still to get her to
understand that the money was really hers and that he did not need it.

"I'll put it in the bank for you," she said finally.

"You'll do nothing of the sort.  It's yours, to do with as you please,
and if you won't take it, I'll give it to Maria.  She'll know what to do
with it.  I'd suggest, though, that you hire a servant and take a good
long rest."

"I'm goin' to tell Bernard all about it," she announced, when she was
leaving.

Martin winced, then grinned.

"Yes, do," he said.  "And then, maybe, he'll invite me to dinner again."

"Yes, he will--I'm sure he will!" she exclaimed fervently, as she drew
him to her and kissed and hugged him.


