

CHAPTER XLII


One day Martin became aware that he was lonely.  He was healthy and
strong, and had nothing to do.  The cessation from writing and studying,
the death of Brissenden, and the estrangement from Ruth had made a big
hole in his life; and his life refused to be pinned down to good living
in cafes and the smoking of Egyptian cigarettes.  It was true the South
Seas were calling to him, but he had a feeling that the game was not yet
played out in the United States.  Two books were soon to be published,
and he had more books that might find publication.  Money could be made
out of them, and he would wait and take a sackful of it into the South
Seas.  He knew a valley and a bay in the Marquesas that he could buy for
a thousand Chili dollars.  The valley ran from the horseshoe, land-locked
bay to the tops of the dizzy, cloud-capped peaks and contained perhaps
ten thousand acres.  It was filled with tropical fruits, wild chickens,
and wild pigs, with an occasional herd of wild cattle, while high up
among the peaks were herds of wild goats harried by packs of wild dogs.
The whole place was wild.  Not a human lived in it. And he could buy it
and the bay for a thousand Chili dollars.

The bay, as he remembered it, was magnificent, with water deep enough to
accommodate the largest vessel afloat, and so safe that the South Pacific
Directory recommended it to the best careening place for ships for
hundreds of miles around.  He would buy a schooner--one of those yacht-
like, coppered crafts that sailed like witches--and go trading copra and
pearling among the islands.  He would make the valley and the bay his
headquarters.  He would build a patriarchal grass house like Tati's, and
have it and the valley and the schooner filled with dark-skinned
servitors.  He would entertain there the factor of Taiohae, captains of
wandering traders, and all the best of the South Pacific riffraff.  He
would keep open house and entertain like a prince.  And he would forget
the books he had opened and the world that had proved an illusion.

To do all this he must wait in California to fill the sack with money.
Already it was beginning to flow in.  If one of the books made a strike,
it might enable him to sell the whole heap of manuscripts.  Also he could
collect the stories and the poems into books, and make sure of the valley
and the bay and the schooner.  He would never write again.  Upon that he
was resolved.  But in the meantime, awaiting the publication of the
books, he must do something more than live dazed and stupid in the sort
of uncaring trance into which he had fallen.

He noted, one Sunday morning, that the Bricklayers' Picnic took place
that day at Shell Mound Park, and to Shell Mound Park he went.  He had
been to the working-class picnics too often in his earlier life not to
know what they were like, and as he entered the park he experienced a
recrudescence of all the old sensations.  After all, they were his kind,
these working people.  He had been born among them, he had lived among
them, and though he had strayed for a time, it was well to come back
among them.

"If it ain't Mart!" he heard some one say, and the next moment a hearty
hand was on his shoulder.  "Where you ben all the time?  Off to sea?  Come
on an' have a drink."

It was the old crowd in which he found himself--the old crowd, with here
and there a gap, and here and there a new face.  The fellows were not
bricklayers, but, as in the old days, they attended all Sunday picnics
for the dancing, and the fighting, and the fun.  Martin drank with them,
and began to feel really human once more.  He was a fool to have ever
left them, he thought; and he was very certain that his sum of happiness
would have been greater had he remained with them and let alone the books
and the people who sat in the high places.  Yet the beer seemed not so
good as of yore.  It didn't taste as it used to taste.  Brissenden had
spoiled him for steam beer, he concluded, and wondered if, after all, the
books had spoiled him for companionship with these friends of his youth.
He resolved that he would not be so spoiled, and he went on to the
dancing pavilion.  Jimmy, the plumber, he met there, in the company of a
tall, blond girl who promptly forsook him for Martin.

"Gee, it's like old times," Jimmy explained to the gang that gave him the
laugh as Martin and the blonde whirled away in a waltz.  "An' I don't
give a rap.  I'm too damned glad to see 'm back.  Watch 'm waltz, eh?
It's like silk.  Who'd blame any girl?"

But Martin restored the blonde to Jimmy, and the three of them, with half
a dozen friends, watched the revolving couples and laughed and joked with
one another.  Everybody was glad to see Martin back.  No book of his been
published; he carried no fictitious value in their eyes.  They liked him
for himself.  He felt like a prince returned from excile, and his lonely
heart burgeoned in the geniality in which it bathed.  He made a mad day
of it, and was at his best.  Also, he had money in his pockets, and, as
in the old days when he returned from sea with a pay-day, he made the
money fly.

Once, on the dancing-floor, he saw Lizzie Connolly go by in the arms of a
young workingman; and, later, when he made the round of the pavilion, he
came upon her sitting by a refreshment table.  Surprise and greetings
over, he led her away into the grounds, where they could talk without
shouting down the music.  From the instant he spoke to her, she was his.
He knew it.  She showed it in the proud humility of her eyes, in every
caressing movement of her proudly carried body, and in the way she hung
upon his speech.  She was not the young girl as he had known her.  She
was a woman, now, and Martin noted that her wild, defiant beauty had
improved, losing none of its wildness, while the defiance and the fire
seemed more in control.  "A beauty, a perfect beauty," he murmured
admiringly under his breath.  And he knew she was his, that all he had to
do was to say "Come," and she would go with him over the world wherever
he led.

Even as the thought flashed through his brain he received a heavy blow on
the side of his head that nearly knocked him down.  It was a man's fist,
directed by a man so angry and in such haste that the fist had missed the
jaw for which it was aimed.  Martin turned as he staggered, and saw the
fist coming at him in a wild swing.  Quite as a matter of course he
ducked, and the fist flew harmlessly past, pivoting the man who had
driven it.  Martin hooked with his left, landing on the pivoting man with
the weight of his body behind the blow.  The man went to the ground
sidewise, leaped to his feet, and made a mad rush.  Martin saw his
passion-distorted face and wondered what could be the cause of the
fellow's anger.  But while he wondered, he shot in a straight left, the
weight of his body behind the blow.  The man went over backward and fell
in a crumpled heap.  Jimmy and others of the gang were running toward
them.

Martin was thrilling all over.  This was the old days with a vengeance,
with their dancing, and their fighting, and their fun.  While he kept a
wary eye on his antagonist, he glanced at Lizzie.  Usually the girls
screamed when the fellows got to scrapping, but she had not screamed.  She
was looking on with bated breath, leaning slightly forward, so keen was
her interest, one hand pressed to her breast, her cheek flushed, and in
her eyes a great and amazed admiration.

The man had gained his feet and was struggling to escape the restraining
arms that were laid on him.

"She was waitin' for me to come back!" he was proclaiming to all and
sundry.  "She was waitin' for me to come back, an' then that fresh guy
comes buttin' in.  Let go o' me, I tell yeh.  I'm goin' to fix 'm."

"What's eatin' yer?" Jimmy was demanding, as he helped hold the young
fellow back.  "That guy's Mart Eden.  He's nifty with his mits, lemme
tell you that, an' he'll eat you alive if you monkey with 'm."

"He can't steal her on me that way," the other interjected.

"He licked the Flyin' Dutchman, an' you know _him_," Jimmy went on
expostulating.  "An' he did it in five rounds.  You couldn't last a
minute against him.  See?"

This information seemed to have a mollifying effect, and the irate young
man favored Martin with a measuring stare.

"He don't look it," he sneered; but the sneer was without passion.

"That's what the Flyin' Dutchman thought," Jimmy assured him.  "Come on,
now, let's get outa this.  There's lots of other girls.  Come on."

The young fellow allowed himself to be led away toward the pavilion, and
the gang followed after him.

"Who is he?" Martin asked Lizzie.  "And what's it all about, anyway?"

Already the zest of combat, which of old had been so keen and lasting,
had died down, and he discovered that he was self-analytical, too much so
to live, single heart and single hand, so primitive an existence.

Lizzie tossed her head.

"Oh, he's nobody," she said.  "He's just ben keepin' company with me."

"I had to, you see," she explained after a pause.  "I was gettin' pretty
lonesome.  But I never forgot."  Her voice sank lower, and she looked
straight before her.  "I'd throw 'm down for you any time."

Martin looking at her averted face, knowing that all he had to do was to
reach out his hand and pluck her, fell to pondering whether, after all,
there was any real worth in refined, grammatical English, and, so, forgot
to reply to her.

"You put it all over him," she said tentatively, with a laugh.

"He's a husky young fellow, though," he admitted generously.  "If they
hadn't taken him away, he might have given me my hands full."

"Who was that lady friend I seen you with that night?" she asked
abruptly.

"Oh, just a lady friend," was his answer.

"It was a long time ago," she murmured contemplatively.  "It seems like a
thousand years."

But Martin went no further into the matter.  He led the conversation off
into other channels.  They had lunch in the restaurant, where he ordered
wine and expensive delicacies and afterward he danced with her and with
no one but her, till she was tired.  He was a good dancer, and she
whirled around and around with him in a heaven of delight, her head
against his shoulder, wishing that it could last forever.  Later in the
afternoon they strayed off among the trees, where, in the good old
fashion, she sat down while he sprawled on his back, his head in her lap.
He lay and dozed, while she fondled his hair, looked down on his closed
eyes, and loved him without reserve.  Looking up suddenly, he read the
tender advertisement in her face.  Her eyes fluttered down, then they
opened and looked into his with soft defiance.

"I've kept straight all these years," she said, her voice so low that it
was almost a whisper.

In his heart Martin knew that it was the miraculous truth.  And at his
heart pleaded a great temptation.  It was in his power to make her happy.
Denied happiness himself, why should he deny happiness to her?  He could
marry her and take her down with him to dwell in the grass-walled castle
in the Marquesas.  The desire to do it was strong, but stronger still was
the imperative command of his nature not to do it.  In spite of himself
he was still faithful to Love.  The old days of license and easy living
were gone.  He could not bring them back, nor could he go back to them.
He was changed--how changed he had not realized until now.

"I am not a marrying man, Lizzie," he said lightly.

The hand caressing his hair paused perceptibly, then went on with the
same gentle stroke.  He noticed her face harden, but it was with the
hardness of resolution, for still the soft color was in her cheeks and
she was all glowing and melting.

"I did not mean that--" she began, then faltered.  "Or anyway I don't
care."

"I don't care," she repeated.  "I'm proud to be your friend.  I'd do
anything for you.  I'm made that way, I guess."

Martin sat up.  He took her hand in his.  He did it deliberately, with
warmth but without passion; and such warmth chilled her.

"Don't let's talk about it," she said.

"You are a great and noble woman," he said.  "And it is I who should be
proud to know you.  And I am, I am.  You are a ray of light to me in a
very dark world, and I've got to be straight with you, just as straight
as you have been."

"I don't care whether you're straight with me or not.  You could do
anything with me.  You could throw me in the dirt an' walk on me.  An'
you're the only man in the world that can," she added with a defiant
flash.  "I ain't taken care of myself ever since I was a kid for
nothin'."

"And it's just because of that that I'm not going to," he said gently.
"You are so big and generous that you challenge me to equal generousness.
I'm not marrying, and I'm not--well, loving without marrying, though I've
done my share of that in the past.  I'm sorry I came here to-day and met
you.  But it can't be helped now, and I never expected it would turn out
this way."

"But look here, Lizzie.  I can't begin to tell you how much I like you.  I
do more than like you.  I admire and respect you.  You are magnificent,
and you are magnificently good.  But what's the use of words?  Yet
there's something I'd like to do.  You've had a hard life; let me make it
easy for you."  (A joyous light welled into her eyes, then faded out
again.)  "I'm pretty sure of getting hold of some money soon--lots of
it."

In that moment he abandoned the idea of the valley and the bay, the grass-
walled castle and the trim, white schooner.  After all, what did it
matter?  He could go away, as he had done so often, before the mast, on
any ship bound anywhere.

"I'd like to turn it over to you.  There must be something you want--to
go to school or business college.  You might like to study and be a
stenographer.  I could fix it for you.  Or maybe your father and mother
are living--I could set them up in a grocery store or something.  Anything
you want, just name it, and I can fix it for you."

She made no reply, but sat, gazing straight before her, dry-eyed and
motionless, but with an ache in the throat which Martin divined so
strongly that it made his own throat ache.  He regretted that he had
spoken.  It seemed so tawdry what he had offered her--mere money--compared
with what she offered him.  He offered her an extraneous thing with which
he could part without a pang, while she offered him herself, along with
disgrace and shame, and sin, and all her hopes of heaven.

"Don't let's talk about it," she said with a catch in her voice that she
changed to a cough.  She stood up.  "Come on, let's go home.  I'm all
tired out."

The day was done, and the merrymakers had nearly all departed.  But as
Martin and Lizzie emerged from the trees they found the gang waiting for
them.  Martin knew immediately the meaning of it.  Trouble was brewing.
The gang was his body-guard.  They passed out through the gates of the
park with, straggling in the rear, a second gang, the friends that
Lizzie's young man had collected to avenge the loss of his lady.  Several
constables and special police officers, anticipating trouble, trailed
along to prevent it, and herded the two gangs separately aboard the train
for San Francisco.  Martin told Jimmy that he would get off at Sixteenth
Street Station and catch the electric car into Oakland.  Lizzie was very
quiet and without interest in what was impending.  The train pulled in to
Sixteenth Street Station, and the waiting electric car could be seen, the
conductor of which was impatiently clanging the gong.

"There she is," Jimmy counselled.  "Make a run for it, an' we'll hold 'em
back.  Now you go!  Hit her up!"

The hostile gang was temporarily disconcerted by the manoeuvre, then it
dashed from the train in pursuit.  The staid and sober Oakland folk who
sat upon the car scarcely noted the young fellow and the girl who ran for
it and found a seat in front on the outside.  They did not connect the
couple with Jimmy, who sprang on the steps, crying to the motorman:-

"Slam on the juice, old man, and beat it outa here!"

The next moment Jimmy whirled about, and the passengers saw him land his
fist on the face of a running man who was trying to board the car.  But
fists were landing on faces the whole length of the car.  Thus, Jimmy and
his gang, strung out on the long, lower steps, met the attacking gang.
The car started with a great clanging of its gong, and, as Jimmy's gang
drove off the last assailants, they, too, jumped off to finish the job.
The car dashed on, leaving the flurry of combat far behind, and its
dumfounded passengers never dreamed that the quiet young man and the
pretty working-girl sitting in the corner on the outside seat had been
the cause of the row.

Martin had enjoyed the fight, with a recrudescence of the old fighting
thrills.  But they quickly died away, and he was oppressed by a great
sadness.  He felt very old--centuries older than those careless, care-
free young companions of his others days.  He had travelled far, too far
to go back.  Their mode of life, which had once been his, was now
distasteful to him.  He was disappointed in it all.  He had developed
into an alien.  As the steam beer had tasted raw, so their companionship
seemed raw to him.  He was too far removed.  Too many thousands of opened
books yawned between them and him.  He had exiled himself.  He had
travelled in the vast realm of intellect until he could no longer return
home.  On the other hand, he was human, and his gregarious need for
companionship remained unsatisfied.  He had found no new home.  As the
gang could not understand him, as his own family could not understand
him, as the bourgeoisie could not understand him, so this girl beside
him, whom he honored high, could not understand him nor the honor he paid
her.  His sadness was not untouched with bitterness as he thought it
over.

"Make it up with him," he advised Lizzie, at parting, as they stood in
front of the workingman's shack in which she lived, near Sixth and
Market.  He referred to the young fellow whose place he had usurped that
day.

"I can't--now," she said.

"Oh, go on," he said jovially.  "All you have to do is whistle and he'll
come running."

"I didn't mean that," she said simply.

And he knew what she had meant.

She leaned toward him as he was about to say good night.  But she leaned
not imperatively, not seductively, but wistfully and humbly.  He was
touched to the heart.  His large tolerance rose up in him.  He put his
arms around her, and kissed her, and knew that upon his own lips rested
as true a kiss as man ever received.

"My God!" she sobbed.  "I could die for you.  I could die for you."

She tore herself from him suddenly and ran up the steps.  He felt a quick
moisture in his eyes.

"Martin Eden," he communed.  "You're not a brute, and you're a damn poor
Nietzscheman.  You'd marry her if you could and fill her quivering heart
full with happiness.  But you can't, you can't.  And it's a damn shame."

"'A poor old tramp explains his poor old ulcers,'" he muttered,
remembering his Henly.  "'Life is, I think, a blunder and a shame.'  It
is--a blunder and a shame."


