

CHAPTER XLIII


"The Shame of the Sun" was published in October.  As Martin cut the cords
of the express package and the half-dozen complimentary copies from the
publishers spilled out on the table, a heavy sadness fell upon him.  He
thought of the wild delight that would have been his had this happened a
few short months before, and he contrasted that delight that should have
been with his present uncaring coldness.  His book, his first book, and
his pulse had not gone up a fraction of a beat, and he was only sad.  It
meant little to him now.  The most it meant was that it might bring some
money, and little enough did he care for money.

He carried a copy out into the kitchen and presented it to Maria.

"I did it," he explained, in order to clear up her bewilderment.  "I
wrote it in the room there, and I guess some few quarts of your vegetable
soup went into the making of it.  Keep it.  It's yours.  Just to remember
me by, you know."

He was not bragging, not showing off.  His sole motive was to make her
happy, to make her proud of him, to justify her long faith in him.  She
put the book in the front room on top of the family Bible.  A sacred
thing was this book her lodger had made, a fetich of friendship.  It
softened the blow of his having been a laundryman, and though she could
not understand a line of it, she knew that every line of it was great.
She was a simple, practical, hard-working woman, but she possessed faith
in large endowment.

Just as emotionlessly as he had received "The Shame of the Sun" did he
read the reviews of it that came in weekly from the clipping bureau.  The
book was making a hit, that was evident.  It meant more gold in the money
sack.  He could fix up Lizzie, redeem all his promises, and still have
enough left to build his grass-walled castle.

Singletree, Darnley & Co. had cautiously brought out an edition of
fifteen hundred copies, but the first reviews had started a second
edition of twice the size through the presses; and ere this was delivered
a third edition of five thousand had been ordered.  A London firm made
arrangements by cable for an English edition, and hot-footed upon this
came the news of French, German, and Scandinavian translations in
progress.  The attack upon the Maeterlinck school could not have been
made at a more opportune moment.  A fierce controversy was precipitated.
Saleeby and Haeckel indorsed and defended "The Shame of the Sun," for
once finding themselves on the same side of a question.  Crookes and
Wallace ranged up on the opposing side, while Sir Oliver Lodge attempted
to formulate a compromise that would jibe with his particular cosmic
theories.  Maeterlinck's followers rallied around the standard of
mysticism.  Chesterton set the whole world laughing with a series of
alleged non-partisan essays on the subject, and the whole affair,
controversy and controversialists, was well-nigh swept into the pit by a
thundering broadside from George Bernard Shaw.  Needless to say the arena
was crowded with hosts of lesser lights, and the dust and sweat and din
became terrific.

"It is a most marvellous happening," Singletree, Darnley & Co. wrote
Martin, "a critical philosophic essay selling like a novel.  You could
not have chosen your subject better, and all contributory factors have
been unwarrantedly propitious.  We need scarcely to assure you that we
are making hay while the sun shines.  Over forty thousand copies have
already been sold in the United States and Canada, and a new edition of
twenty thousand is on the presses.  We are overworked, trying to supply
the demand.  Nevertheless we have helped to create that demand.  We have
already spent five thousand dollars in advertising.  The book is bound to
be a record-breaker."

"Please find herewith a contract in duplicate for your next book which we
have taken the liberty of forwarding to you.  You will please note that
we have increased your royalties to twenty per cent, which is about as
high as a conservative publishing house dares go.  If our offer is
agreeable to you, please fill in the proper blank space with the title of
your book.  We make no stipulations concerning its nature.  Any book on
any subject.  If you have one already written, so much the better.  Now
is the time to strike.  The iron could not be hotter."

"On receipt of signed contract we shall be pleased to make you an advance
on royalties of five thousand dollars.  You see, we have faith in you,
and we are going in on this thing big.  We should like, also, to discuss
with you the drawing up of a contract for a term of years, say ten,
during which we shall have the exclusive right of publishing in book-form
all that you produce.  But more of this anon."

Martin laid down the letter and worked a problem in mental arithmetic,
finding the product of fifteen cents times sixty thousand to be nine
thousand dollars.  He signed the new contract, inserting "The Smoke of
Joy" in the blank space, and mailed it back to the publishers along with
the twenty storiettes he had written in the days before he discovered the
formula for the newspaper storiette.  And promptly as the United States
mail could deliver and return, came Singletree, Darnley & Co.'s check for
five thousand dollars.

"I want you to come down town with me, Maria, this afternoon about two
o'clock," Martin said, the morning the check arrived.  "Or, better, meet
me at Fourteenth and Broadway at two o'clock.  I'll be looking out for
you."

At the appointed time she was there; but _shoes_ was the only clew to the
mystery her mind had been capable of evolving, and she suffered a
distinct shock of disappointment when Martin walked her right by a shoe-
store and dived into a real estate office.  What happened thereupon
resided forever after in her memory as a dream.  Fine gentlemen smiled at
her benevolently as they talked with Martin and one another; a
type-writer clicked; signatures were affixed to an imposing document; her
own landlord was there, too, and affixed his signature; and when all was
over and she was outside on the sidewalk, her landlord spoke to her,
saying, "Well, Maria, you won't have to pay me no seven dollars and a
half this month."

Maria was too stunned for speech.

"Or next month, or the next, or the next," her landlord said.

She thanked him incoherently, as if for a favor.  And it was not until
she had returned home to North Oakland and conferred with her own kind,
and had the Portuguese grocer investigate, that she really knew that she
was the owner of the little house in which she had lived and for which
she had paid rent so long.

"Why don't you trade with me no more?" the Portuguese grocer asked Martin
that evening, stepping out to hail him when he got off the car; and
Martin explained that he wasn't doing his own cooking any more, and then
went in and had a drink of wine on the house.  He noted it was the best
wine the grocer had in stock.

"Maria," Martin announced that night, "I'm going to leave you.  And
you're going to leave here yourself soon.  Then you can rent the house
and be a landlord yourself.  You've a brother in San Leandro or Haywards,
and he's in the milk business.  I want you to send all your washing back
unwashed--understand?--unwashed, and to go out to San Leandro to-morrow,
or Haywards, or wherever it is, and see that brother of yours.  Tell him
to come to see me.  I'll be stopping at the Metropole down in Oakland.
He'll know a good milk-ranch when he sees one."

And so it was that Maria became a landlord and the sole owner of a dairy,
with two hired men to do the work for her and a bank account that
steadily increased despite the fact that her whole brood wore shoes and
went to school.  Few persons ever meet the fairy princes they dream
about; but Maria, who worked hard and whose head was hard, never dreaming
about fairy princes, entertained hers in the guise of an ex-laundryman.

In the meantime the world had begun to ask: "Who is this Martin Eden?"  He
had declined to give any biographical data to his publishers, but the
newspapers were not to be denied.  Oakland was his own town, and the
reporters nosed out scores of individuals who could supply information.
All that he was and was not, all that he had done and most of what he had
not done, was spread out for the delectation of the public, accompanied
by snapshots and photographs--the latter procured from the local
photographer who had once taken Martin's picture and who promptly
copyrighted it and put it on the market.  At first, so great was his
disgust with the magazines and all bourgeois society, Martin fought
against publicity; but in the end, because it was easier than not to, he
surrendered.  He found that he could not refuse himself to the special
writers who travelled long distances to see him.  Then again, each day
was so many hours long, and, since he no longer was occupied with writing
and studying, those hours had to be occupied somehow; so he yielded to
what was to him a whim, permitted interviews, gave his opinions on
literature and philosophy, and even accepted invitations of the
bourgeoisie.  He had settled down into a strange and comfortable state of
mind.  He no longer cared.  He forgave everybody, even the cub reporter
who had painted him red and to whom he now granted a full page with
specially posed photographs.

He saw Lizzie occasionally, and it was patent that she regretted the
greatness that had come to him.  It widened the space between them.
Perhaps it was with the hope of narrowing it that she yielded to his
persuasions to go to night school and business college and to have
herself gowned by a wonderful dressmaker who charged outrageous prices.
She improved visibly from day to day, until Martin wondered if he was
doing right, for he knew that all her compliance and endeavor was for his
sake.  She was trying to make herself of worth in his eyes--of the sort
of worth he seemed to value.  Yet he gave her no hope, treating her in
brotherly fashion and rarely seeing her.

"Overdue" was rushed upon the market by the Meredith-Lowell Company in
the height of his popularity, and being fiction, in point of sales it
made even a bigger strike than "The Shame of the Sun."  Week after week
his was the credit of the unprecedented performance of having two books
at the head of the list of best-sellers.  Not only did the story take
with the fiction-readers, but those who read "The Shame of the Sun" with
avidity were likewise attracted to the sea-story by the cosmic grasp of
mastery with which he had handled it.  First he had attacked the
literature of mysticism, and had done it exceeding well; and, next, he
had successfully supplied the very literature he had exposited, thus
proving himself to be that rare genius, a critic and a creator in one.

Money poured in on him, fame poured in on him; he flashed, comet-like,
through the world of literature, and he was more amused than interested
by the stir he was making.  One thing was puzzling him, a little thing
that would have puzzled the world had it known.  But the world would have
puzzled over his bepuzzlement rather than over the little thing that to
him loomed gigantic.  Judge Blount invited him to dinner.  That was the
little thing, or the beginning of the little thing, that was soon to
become the big thing.  He had insulted Judge Blount, treated him
abominably, and Judge Blount, meeting him on the street, invited him to
dinner.  Martin bethought himself of the numerous occasions on which he
had met Judge Blount at the Morses' and when Judge Blount had not invited
him to dinner.  Why had he not invited him to dinner then? he asked
himself.  He had not changed.  He was the same Martin Eden.  What made
the difference?  The fact that the stuff he had written had appeared
inside the covers of books?  But it was work performed.  It was not
something he had done since.  It was achievement accomplished at the very
time Judge Blount was sharing this general view and sneering at his
Spencer and his intellect.  Therefore it was not for any real value, but
for a purely fictitious value that Judge Blount invited him to dinner.

Martin grinned and accepted the invitation, marvelling the while at his
complacence.  And at the dinner, where, with their womankind, were half a
dozen of those that sat in high places, and where Martin found himself
quite the lion, Judge Blount, warmly seconded by Judge Hanwell, urged
privately that Martin should permit his name to be put up for the
Styx--the ultra-select club to which belonged, not the mere men of
wealth, but the men of attainment.  And Martin declined, and was more
puzzled than ever.

He was kept busy disposing of his heap of manuscripts.  He was
overwhelmed by requests from editors.  It had been discovered that he was
a stylist, with meat under his style.  The Northern Review, after
publishing "The Cradle of Beauty," had written him for half a dozen
similar essays, which would have been supplied out of the heap, had not
Burton's Magazine, in a speculative mood, offered him five hundred
dollars each for five essays.  He wrote back that he would supply the
demand, but at a thousand dollars an essay.  He remembered that all these
manuscripts had been refused by the very magazines that were now
clamoring for them.  And their refusals had been cold-blooded, automatic,
stereotyped.  They had made him sweat, and now he intended to make them
sweat.  Burton's Magazine paid his price for five essays, and the
remaining four, at the same rate, were snapped up by Mackintosh's
Monthly, The Northern Review being too poor to stand the pace.  Thus went
out to the world "The High Priests of Mystery," "The Wonder-Dreamers,"
"The Yardstick of the Ego," "Philosophy of Illusion," "God and Clod,"
"Art and Biology," "Critics and Test-tubes," "Star-dust," and "The
Dignity of Usury,"--to raise storms and rumblings and mutterings that
were many a day in dying down.

Editors wrote to him telling him to name his own terms, which he did, but
it was always for work performed.  He refused resolutely to pledge
himself to any new thing.  The thought of again setting pen to paper
maddened him.  He had seen Brissenden torn to pieces by the crowd, and
despite the fact that him the crowd acclaimed, he could not get over the
shock nor gather any respect for the crowd.  His very popularity seemed a
disgrace and a treason to Brissenden.  It made him wince, but he made up
his mind to go on and fill the money-bag.

He received letters from editors like the following: "About a year ago we
were unfortunate enough to refuse your collection of love-poems.  We were
greatly impressed by them at the time, but certain arrangements already
entered into prevented our taking them.  If you still have them, and if
you will be kind enough to forward them, we shall be glad to publish the
entire collection on your own terms.  We are also prepared to make a most
advantageous offer for bringing them out in book-form."

Martin recollected his blank-verse tragedy, and sent it instead.  He read
it over before mailing, and was particularly impressed by its sophomoric
amateurishness and general worthlessness.  But he sent it; and it was
published, to the everlasting regret of the editor.  The public was
indignant and incredulous.  It was too far a cry from Martin Eden's high
standard to that serious bosh.  It was asserted that he had never written
it, that the magazine had faked it very clumsily, or that Martin Eden was
emulating the elder Dumas and at the height of success was hiring his
writing done for him.  But when he explained that the tragedy was an
early effort of his literary childhood, and that the magazine had refused
to be happy unless it got it, a great laugh went up at the magazine's
expense and a change in the editorship followed.  The tragedy was never
brought out in book-form, though Martin pocketed the advance royalties
that had been paid.

Coleman's Weekly sent Martin a lengthy telegram, costing nearly three
hundred dollars, offering him a thousand dollars an article for twenty
articles.  He was to travel over the United States, with all expenses
paid, and select whatever topics interested him.  The body of the
telegram was devoted to hypothetical topics in order to show him the
freedom of range that was to be his.  The only restriction placed upon
him was that he must confine himself to the United States.  Martin sent
his inability to accept and his regrets by wire "collect."

"Wiki-Wiki," published in Warren's Monthly, was an instantaneous success.
It was brought out forward in a wide-margined, beautifully decorated
volume that struck the holiday trade and sold like wildfire.  The critics
were unanimous in the belief that it would take its place with those two
classics by two great writers, "The Bottle Imp" and "The Magic Skin."

The public, however, received the "Smoke of Joy" collection rather
dubiously and coldly.  The audacity and unconventionality of the
storiettes was a shock to bourgeois morality and prejudice; but when
Paris went mad over the immediate translation that was made, the American
and English reading public followed suit and bought so many copies that
Martin compelled the conservative house of Singletree, Darnley & Co. to
pay a flat royalty of twenty-five per cent for a third book, and thirty
per cent flat for a fourth.  These two volumes comprised all the short
stories he had written and which had received, or were receiving, serial
publication.  "The Ring of Bells" and his horror stories constituted one
collection; the other collection was composed of "Adventure," "The Pot,"
"The Wine of Life," "The Whirlpool," "The Jostling Street," and four
other stories.  The Lowell-Meredith Company captured the collection of
all his essays, and the Maxmillian Company got his "Sea Lyrics" and the
"Love-cycle," the latter receiving serial publication in the Ladies' Home
Companion after the payment of an extortionate price.

Martin heaved a sigh of relief when he had disposed of the last
manuscript.  The grass-walled castle and the white, coppered schooner
were very near to him.  Well, at any rate he had discovered Brissenden's
contention that nothing of merit found its way into the magazines.  His
own success demonstrated that Brissenden had been wrong.

And yet, somehow, he had a feeling that Brissenden had been right, after
all.  "The Shame of the Sun" had been the cause of his success more than
the stuff he had written.  That stuff had been merely incidental.  It had
been rejected right and left by the magazines.  The publication of "The
Shame of the Sun" had started a controversy and precipitated the
landslide in his favor.  Had there been no "Shame of the Sun" there would
have been no landslide, and had there been no miracle in the go of "The
Shame of the Sun" there would have been no landslide.  Singletree,
Darnley & Co. attested that miracle.  They had brought out a first
edition of fifteen hundred copies and been dubious of selling it.  They
were experienced publishers and no one had been more astounded than they
at the success which had followed.  To them it had been in truth a
miracle.  They never got over it, and every letter they wrote him
reflected their reverent awe of that first mysterious happening.  They
did not attempt to explain it.  There was no explaining it.  It had
happened.  In the face of all experience to the contrary, it had
happened.

So it was, reasoning thus, that Martin questioned the validity of his
popularity.  It was the bourgeoisie that bought his books and poured its
gold into his money-sack, and from what little he knew of the bourgeoisie
it was not clear to him how it could possibly appreciate or comprehend
what he had written.  His intrinsic beauty and power meant nothing to the
hundreds of thousands who were acclaiming him and buying his books.  He
was the fad of the hour, the adventurer who had stormed Parnassus while
the gods nodded.  The hundreds of thousands read him and acclaimed him
with the same brute non-understanding with which they had flung
themselves on Brissenden's "Ephemera" and torn it to pieces--a
wolf-rabble that fawned on him instead of fanging him.  Fawn or fang, it
was all a matter of chance.  One thing he knew with absolute certitude:
"Ephemera" was infinitely greater than anything he had done.  It was
infinitely greater than anything he had in him.  It was a poem of
centuries.  Then the tribute the mob paid him was a sorry tribute indeed,
for that same mob had wallowed "Ephemera" into the mire.  He sighed
heavily and with satisfaction.  He was glad the last manuscript was sold
and that he would soon be done with it all.


