

CHAPTER XLV


Kreis came to Martin one day--Kreis, of the "real dirt"; and Martin
turned to him with relief, to receive the glowing details of a scheme
sufficiently wild-catty to interest him as a fictionist rather than an
investor.  Kreis paused long enough in the midst of his exposition to
tell him that in most of his "Shame of the Sun" he had been a chump.

"But I didn't come here to spout philosophy," Kreis went on.  "What I
want to know is whether or not you will put a thousand dollars in on this
deal?"

"No, I'm not chump enough for that, at any rate," Martin answered.  "But
I'll tell you what I will do.  You gave me the greatest night of my life.
You gave me what money cannot buy.  Now I've got money, and it means
nothing to me.  I'd like to turn over to you a thousand dollars of what I
don't value for what you gave me that night and which was beyond price.
You need the money.  I've got more than I need.  You want it.  You came
for it.  There's no use scheming it out of me.  Take it."

Kreis betrayed no surprise.  He folded the check away in his pocket.

"At that rate I'd like the contract of providing you with many such
nights," he said.

"Too late."  Martin shook his head.  "That night was the one night for
me.  I was in paradise.  It's commonplace with you, I know.  But it
wasn't to me.  I shall never live at such a pitch again.  I'm done with
philosophy.  I want never to hear another word of it."

"The first dollar I ever made in my life out of my philosophy," Kreis
remarked, as he paused in the doorway.  "And then the market broke."

Mrs. Morse drove by Martin on the street one day, and smiled and nodded.
He smiled back and lifted his hat.  The episode did not affect him.  A
month before it might have disgusted him, or made him curious and set him
to speculating about her state of consciousness at that moment.  But now
it was not provocative of a second thought.  He forgot about it the next
moment.  He forgot about it as he would have forgotten the Central Bank
Building or the City Hall after having walked past them.  Yet his mind
was preternaturally active.  His thoughts went ever around and around in
a circle.  The centre of that circle was "work performed"; it ate at his
brain like a deathless maggot.  He awoke to it in the morning.  It
tormented his dreams at night.  Every affair of life around him that
penetrated through his senses immediately related itself to "work
performed."  He drove along the path of relentless logic to the
conclusion that he was nobody, nothing.  Mart Eden, the hoodlum, and Mart
Eden, the sailor, had been real, had been he; but Martin Eden! the famous
writer, did not exist.  Martin Eden, the famous writer, was a vapor that
had arisen in the mob-mind and by the mob-mind had been thrust into the
corporeal being of Mart Eden, the hoodlum and sailor.  But it couldn't
fool him.  He was not that sun-myth that the mob was worshipping and
sacrificing dinners to.  He knew better.

He read the magazines about himself, and pored over portraits of himself
published therein until he was unable to associate his identity with
those portraits.  He was the fellow who had lived and thrilled and loved;
who had been easy-going and tolerant of the frailties of life; who had
served in the forecastle, wandered in strange lands, and led his gang in
the old fighting days.  He was the fellow who had been stunned at first
by the thousands of books in the free library, and who had afterward
learned his way among them and mastered them; he was the fellow who had
burned the midnight oil and bedded with a spur and written books himself.
But the one thing he was not was that colossal appetite that all the mob
was bent upon feeding.

There were things, however, in the magazines that amused him.  All the
magazines were claiming him.  Warren's Monthly advertised to its
subscribers that it was always on the quest after new writers, and that,
among others, it had introduced Martin Eden to the reading public.  The
White Mouse claimed him; so did The Northern Review and Mackintosh's
Magazine, until silenced by The Globe, which pointed triumphantly to its
files where the mangled "Sea Lyrics" lay buried.  Youth and Age, which
had come to life again after having escaped paying its bills, put in a
prior claim, which nobody but farmers' children ever read.  The
Transcontinental made a dignified and convincing statement of how it
first discovered Martin Eden, which was warmly disputed by The Hornet,
with the exhibit of "The Peri and the Pearl."  The modest claim of
Singletree, Darnley & Co. was lost in the din.  Besides, that publishing
firm did not own a magazine wherewith to make its claim less modest.

The newspapers calculated Martin's royalties.  In some way the
magnificent offers certain magazines had made him leaked out, and Oakland
ministers called upon him in a friendly way, while professional begging
letters began to clutter his mail.  But worse than all this were the
women.  His photographs were published broadcast, and special writers
exploited his strong, bronzed face, his scars, his heavy shoulders, his
clear, quiet eyes, and the slight hollows in his cheeks like an
ascetic's.  At this last he remembered his wild youth and smiled.  Often,
among the women he met, he would see now one, now another, looking at
him, appraising him, selecting him.  He laughed to himself.  He
remembered Brissenden's warning and laughed again.  The women would never
destroy him, that much was certain.  He had gone past that stage.

Once, walking with Lizzie toward night school, she caught a glance
directed toward him by a well-gowned, handsome woman of the bourgeoisie.
The glance was a trifle too long, a shade too considerative.  Lizzie knew
it for what it was, and her body tensed angrily.  Martin noticed, noticed
the cause of it, told her how used he was becoming to it and that he did
not care anyway.

"You ought to care," she answered with blazing eyes.  "You're sick.
That's what's the matter."

"Never healthier in my life.  I weigh five pounds more than I ever did."

"It ain't your body.  It's your head.  Something's wrong with your think-
machine.  Even I can see that, an' I ain't nobody."

He walked on beside her, reflecting.

"I'd give anything to see you get over it," she broke out impulsively.
"You ought to care when women look at you that way, a man like you.  It's
not natural.  It's all right enough for sissy-boys.  But you ain't made
that way.  So help me, I'd be willing an' glad if the right woman came
along an' made you care."

When he left Lizzie at night school, he returned to the Metropole.

Once in his rooms, he dropped into a Morris chair and sat staring
straight before him.  He did not doze.  Nor did he think.  His mind was a
blank, save for the intervals when unsummoned memory pictures took form
and color and radiance just under his eyelids.  He saw these pictures,
but he was scarcely conscious of them--no more so than if they had been
dreams.  Yet he was not asleep.  Once, he roused himself and glanced at
his watch.  It was just eight o'clock.  He had nothing to do, and it was
too early for bed.  Then his mind went blank again, and the pictures
began to form and vanish under his eyelids.  There was nothing
distinctive about the pictures.  They were always masses of leaves and
shrub-like branches shot through with hot sunshine.

A knock at the door aroused him.  He was not asleep, and his mind
immediately connected the knock with a telegram, or letter, or perhaps
one of the servants bringing back clean clothes from the laundry.  He was
thinking about Joe and wondering where he was, as he said, "Come in."

He was still thinking about Joe, and did not turn toward the door.  He
heard it close softly.  There was a long silence.  He forgot that there
had been a knock at the door, and was still staring blankly before him
when he heard a woman's sob.  It was involuntary, spasmodic, checked, and
stifled--he noted that as he turned about.  The next instant he was on
his feet.

"Ruth!" he said, amazed and bewildered.

Her face was white and strained.  She stood just inside the door, one
hand against it for support, the other pressed to her side.  She extended
both hands toward him piteously, and started forward to meet him.  As he
caught her hands and led her to the Morris chair he noticed how cold they
were.  He drew up another chair and sat down on the broad arm of it.  He
was too confused to speak.  In his own mind his affair with Ruth was
closed and sealed.  He felt much in the same way that he would have felt
had the Shelly Hot Springs Laundry suddenly invaded the Hotel Metropole
with a whole week's washing ready for him to pitch into.  Several times
he was about to speak, and each time he hesitated.

"No one knows I am here," Ruth said in a faint voice, with an appealing
smile.

"What did you say?"

He was surprised at the sound of his own voice.

She repeated her words.

"Oh," he said, then wondered what more he could possibly say.

"I saw you come in, and I waited a few minutes."

"Oh," he said again.

He had never been so tongue-tied in his life.  Positively he did not have
an idea in his head.  He felt stupid and awkward, but for the life of him
he could think of nothing to say.  It would have been easier had the
intrusion been the Shelly Hot Springs laundry.  He could have rolled up
his sleeves and gone to work.

"And then you came in," he said finally.

She nodded, with a slightly arch expression, and loosened the scarf at
her throat.

"I saw you first from across the street when you were with that girl."

"Oh, yes," he said simply.  "I took her down to night school."

"Well, aren't you glad to see me?" she said at the end of another
silence.

"Yes, yes."  He spoke hastily.  "But wasn't it rash of you to come here?"

"I slipped in.  Nobody knows I am here.  I wanted to see you.  I came to
tell you I have been very foolish.  I came because I could no longer stay
away, because my heart compelled me to come, because--because I wanted to
come."

She came forward, out of her chair and over to him.  She rested her hand
on his shoulder a moment, breathing quickly, and then slipped into his
arms.  And in his large, easy way, desirous of not inflicting hurt,
knowing that to repulse this proffer of herself was to inflict the most
grievous hurt a woman could receive, he folded his arms around her and
held her close.  But there was no warmth in the embrace, no caress in the
contact.  She had come into his arms, and he held her, that was all.  She
nestled against him, and then, with a change of position, her hands crept
up and rested upon his neck.  But his flesh was not fire beneath those
hands, and he felt awkward and uncomfortable.

"What makes you tremble so?" he asked.  "Is it a chill?  Shall I light
the grate?"

He made a movement to disengage himself, but she clung more closely to
him, shivering violently.

"It is merely nervousness," she said with chattering teeth.  "I'll
control myself in a minute.  There, I am better already."

Slowly her shivering died away.  He continued to hold her, but he was no
longer puzzled.  He knew now for what she had come.

"My mother wanted me to marry Charley Hapgood," she announced.

"Charley Hapgood, that fellow who speaks always in platitudes?" Martin
groaned.  Then he added, "And now, I suppose, your mother wants you to
marry me."

He did not put it in the form of a question.  He stated it as a
certitude, and before his eyes began to dance the rows of figures of his
royalties.

"She will not object, I know that much," Ruth said.

"She considers me quite eligible?"

Ruth nodded.

"And yet I am not a bit more eligible now than I was when she broke our
engagement," he meditated.  "I haven't changed any.  I'm the same Martin
Eden, though for that matter I'm a bit worse--I smoke now.  Don't you
smell my breath?"

In reply she pressed her open fingers against his lips, placed them
graciously and playfully, and in expectancy of the kiss that of old had
always been a consequence.  But there was no caressing answer of Martin's
lips.  He waited until the fingers were removed and then went on.

"I am not changed.  I haven't got a job.  I'm not looking for a job.
Furthermore, I am not going to look for a job.  And I still believe that
Herbert Spencer is a great and noble man and that Judge Blount is an
unmitigated ass.  I had dinner with him the other night, so I ought to
know."

"But you didn't accept father's invitation," she chided.

"So you know about that?  Who sent him?  Your mother?"

She remained silent.

"Then she did send him.  I thought so.  And now I suppose she has sent
you."

"No one knows that I am here," she protested.  "Do you think my mother
would permit this?"

"She'd permit you to marry me, that's certain."

She gave a sharp cry.  "Oh, Martin, don't be cruel.  You have not kissed
me once.  You are as unresponsive as a stone.  And think what I have
dared to do."  She looked about her with a shiver, though half the look
was curiosity.  "Just think of where I am."

"_I could die for you!  I could die for you_!"--Lizzie's words were
ringing in his ears.

"Why didn't you dare it before?" he asked harshly.  "When I hadn't a job?
When I was starving?  When I was just as I am now, as a man, as an
artist, the same Martin Eden?  That's the question I've been propounding
to myself for many a day--not concerning you merely, but concerning
everybody.  You see I have not changed, though my sudden apparent
appreciation in value compels me constantly to reassure myself on that
point.  I've got the same flesh on my bones, the same ten fingers and
toes.  I am the same.  I have not developed any new strength nor virtue.
My brain is the same old brain.  I haven't made even one new
generalization on literature or philosophy.  I am personally of the same
value that I was when nobody wanted me.  And what is puzzling me is why
they want me now.  Surely they don't want me for myself, for myself is
the same old self they did not want.  Then they must want me for
something else, for something that is outside of me, for something that
is not I!  Shall I tell you what that something is?  It is for the
recognition I have received.  That recognition is not I.  It resides in
the minds of others.  Then again for the money I have earned and am
earning.  But that money is not I.  It resides in banks and in the
pockets of Tom, Dick, and Harry.  And is it for that, for the recognition
and the money, that you now want me?"

"You are breaking my heart," she sobbed.  "You know I love you, that I am
here because I love you."

"I am afraid you don't see my point," he said gently.  "What I mean is:
if you love me, how does it happen that you love me now so much more than
you did when your love was weak enough to deny me?"

"Forget and forgive," she cried passionately.  "I loved you all the time,
remember that, and I am here, now, in your arms."

"I'm afraid I am a shrewd merchant, peering into the scales, trying to
weigh your love and find out what manner of thing it is."

She withdrew herself from his arms, sat upright, and looked at him long
and searchingly.  She was about to speak, then faltered and changed her
mind.

"You see, it appears this way to me," he went on.  "When I was all that I
am now, nobody out of my own class seemed to care for me.  When my books
were all written, no one who had read the manuscripts seemed to care for
them.  In point of fact, because of the stuff I had written they seemed
to care even less for me.  In writing the stuff it seemed that I had
committed acts that were, to say the least, derogatory.  'Get a job,'
everybody said."

She made a movement of dissent.

"Yes, yes," he said; "except in your case you told me to get a position.
The homely word _job_, like much that I have written, offends you.  It is
brutal.  But I assure you it was no less brutal to me when everybody I
knew recommended it to me as they would recommend right conduct to an
immoral creature.  But to return.  The publication of what I had written,
and the public notice I received, wrought a change in the fibre of your
love.  Martin Eden, with his work all performed, you would not marry.
Your love for him was not strong enough to enable you to marry him.  But
your love is now strong enough, and I cannot avoid the conclusion that
its strength arises from the publication and the public notice.  In your
case I do not mention royalties, though I am certain that they apply to
the change wrought in your mother and father.  Of course, all this is not
flattering to me.  But worst of all, it makes me question love, sacred
love.  Is love so gross a thing that it must feed upon publication and
public notice?  It would seem so.  I have sat and thought upon it till my
head went around."

"Poor, dear head."  She reached up a hand and passed the fingers
soothingly through his hair.  "Let it go around no more.  Let us begin
anew, now.  I loved you all the time.  I know that I was weak in yielding
to my mother's will.  I should not have done so.  Yet I have heard you
speak so often with broad charity of the fallibility and frailty of
humankind.  Extend that charity to me.  I acted mistakenly.  Forgive me."

"Oh, I do forgive," he said impatiently.  "It is easy to forgive where
there is really nothing to forgive.  Nothing that you have done requires
forgiveness.  One acts according to one's lights, and more than that one
cannot do.  As well might I ask you to forgive me for my not getting a
job."

"I meant well," she protested.  "You know that I could not have loved you
and not meant well."

"True; but you would have destroyed me out of your well-meaning."

"Yes, yes," he shut off her attempted objection.  "You would have
destroyed my writing and my career.  Realism is imperative to my nature,
and the bourgeois spirit hates realism.  The bourgeoisie is cowardly.  It
is afraid of life.  And all your effort was to make me afraid of life.
You would have formalized me.  You would have compressed me into a two-by-
four pigeonhole of life, where all life's values are unreal, and false,
and vulgar."  He felt her stir protestingly.  "Vulgarity--a hearty
vulgarity, I'll admit--is the basis of bourgeois refinement and culture.
As I say, you wanted to formalize me, to make me over into one of your
own class, with your class-ideals, class-values, and class-prejudices."
He shook his head sadly.  "And you do not understand, even now, what I am
saying.  My words do not mean to you what I endeavor to make them mean.
What I say is so much fantasy to you.  Yet to me it is vital reality.  At
the best you are a trifle puzzled and amused that this raw boy, crawling
up out of the mire of the abyss, should pass judgment upon your class and
call it vulgar."

She leaned her head wearily against his shoulder, and her body shivered
with recurrent nervousness.  He waited for a time for her to speak, and
then went on.

"And now you want to renew our love.  You want us to be married.  You
want me.  And yet, listen--if my books had not been noticed, I'd
nevertheless have been just what I am now.  And you would have stayed
away.  It is all those damned books--"

"Don't swear," she interrupted.

Her reproof startled him.  He broke into a harsh laugh.

"That's it," he said, "at a high moment, when what seems your life's
happiness is at stake, you are afraid of life in the same old way--afraid
of life and a healthy oath."

She was stung by his words into realization of the puerility of her act,
and yet she felt that he had magnified it unduly and was consequently
resentful.  They sat in silence for a long time, she thinking desperately
and he pondering upon his love which had departed.  He knew, now, that he
had not really loved her.  It was an idealized Ruth he had loved, an
ethereal creature of his own creating, the bright and luminous spirit of
his love-poems.  The real bourgeois Ruth, with all the bourgeois failings
and with the hopeless cramp of the bourgeois psychology in her mind, he
had never loved.

She suddenly began to speak.

"I know that much you have said is so.  I have been afraid of life.  I
did not love you well enough.  I have learned to love better.  I love you
for what you are, for what you were, for the ways even by which you have
become.  I love you for the ways wherein you differ from what you call my
class, for your beliefs which I do not understand but which I know I can
come to understand.  I shall devote myself to understanding them.  And
even your smoking and your swearing--they are part of you and I will love
you for them, too.  I can still learn.  In the last ten minutes I have
learned much.  That I have dared to come here is a token of what I have
already learned.  Oh, Martin!--"

She was sobbing and nestling close against him.

For the first time his arms folded her gently and with sympathy, and she
acknowledged it with a happy movement and a brightening face.

"It is too late," he said.  He remembered Lizzie's words.  "I am a sick
man--oh, not my body.  It is my soul, my brain.  I seem to have lost all
values.  I care for nothing.  If you had been this way a few months ago,
it would have been different.  It is too late, now."

"It is not too late," she cried.  "I will show you.  I will prove to you
that my love has grown, that it is greater to me than my class and all
that is dearest to me.  All that is dearest to the bourgeoisie I will
flout.  I am no longer afraid of life.  I will leave my father and
mother, and let my name become a by-word with my friends.  I will come to
you here and now, in free love if you will, and I will be proud and glad
to be with you.  If I have been a traitor to love, I will now, for love's
sake, be a traitor to all that made that earlier treason."

She stood before him, with shining eyes.

"I am waiting, Martin," she whispered, "waiting for you to accept me.
Look at me."

It was splendid, he thought, looking at her.  She had redeemed herself
for all that she had lacked, rising up at last, true woman, superior to
the iron rule of bourgeois convention.  It was splendid, magnificent,
desperate.  And yet, what was the matter with him?  He was not thrilled
nor stirred by what she had done.  It was splendid and magnificent only
intellectually.  In what should have been a moment of fire, he coldly
appraised her.  His heart was untouched.  He was unaware of any desire
for her.  Again he remembered Lizzie's words.

"I am sick, very sick," he said with a despairing gesture.  "How sick I
did not know till now.  Something has gone out of me.  I have always been
unafraid of life, but I never dreamed of being sated with life.  Life has
so filled me that I am empty of any desire for anything.  If there were
room, I should want you, now.  You see how sick I am."

He leaned his head back and closed his eyes; and like a child, crying,
that forgets its grief in watching the sunlight percolate through the
tear-dimmed films over the pupils, so Martin forgot his sickness, the
presence of Ruth, everything, in watching the masses of vegetation, shot
through hotly with sunshine that took form and blazed against this
background of his eyelids.  It was not restful, that green foliage.  The
sunlight was too raw and glaring.  It hurt him to look at it, and yet he
looked, he knew not why.

He was brought back to himself by the rattle of the door-knob.  Ruth was
at the door.

"How shall I get out?" she questioned tearfully.  "I am afraid."

"Oh, forgive me," he cried, springing to his feet.  "I'm not myself, you
know.  I forgot you were here."  He put his hand to his head.  "You see,
I'm not just right.  I'll take you home.  We can go out by the servants'
entrance.  No one will see us.  Pull down that veil and everything will
be all right."

She clung to his arm through the dim-lighted passages and down the narrow
stairs.

"I am safe now," she said, when they emerged on the sidewalk, at the same
time starting to take her hand from his arm.

"No, no, I'll see you home," he answered.

"No, please don't," she objected.  "It is unnecessary."

Again she started to remove her hand.  He felt a momentary curiosity.  Now
that she was out of danger she was afraid.  She was in almost a panic to
be quit of him.  He could see no reason for it and attributed it to her
nervousness.  So he restrained her withdrawing hand and started to walk
on with her.  Halfway down the block, he saw a man in a long overcoat
shrink back into a doorway.  He shot a glance in as he passed by, and,
despite the high turned-up collar, he was certain that he recognized
Ruth's brother, Norman.

During the walk Ruth and Martin held little conversation.  She was
stunned.  He was apathetic.  Once, he mentioned that he was going away,
back to the South Seas, and, once, she asked him to forgive her having
come to him.  And that was all.  The parting at her door was
conventional.  They shook hands, said good night, and he lifted his hat.
The door swung shut, and he lighted a cigarette and turned back for his
hotel.  When he came to the doorway into which he had seen Norman shrink,
he stopped and looked in in a speculative humor.

"She lied," he said aloud.  "She made believe to me that she had dared
greatly, and all the while she knew the brother that brought her was
waiting to take her back."  He burst into laughter.  "Oh, these
bourgeois!  When I was broke, I was not fit to be seen with his sister.
When I have a bank account, he brings her to me."

As he swung on his heel to go on, a tramp, going in the same direction,
begged him over his shoulder.

"Say, mister, can you give me a quarter to get a bed?" were the words.

But it was the voice that made Martin turn around.  The next instant he
had Joe by the hand.

"D'ye remember that time we parted at the Hot Springs?" the other was
saying.  "I said then we'd meet again.  I felt it in my bones.  An' here
we are."

"You're looking good," Martin said admiringly, "and you've put on
weight."

"I sure have."  Joe's face was beaming.  "I never knew what it was to
live till I hit hoboin'.  I'm thirty pounds heavier an' feel tiptop all
the time.  Why, I was worked to skin an' bone in them old days.  Hoboin'
sure agrees with me."

"But you're looking for a bed just the same," Martin chided, "and it's a
cold night."

"Huh?  Lookin' for a bed?"  Joe shot a hand into his hip pocket and
brought it out filled with small change.  "That beats hard graft," he
exulted.  "You just looked good; that's why I battered you."

Martin laughed and gave in.

"You've several full-sized drunks right there," he insinuated.

Joe slid the money back into his pocket.

"Not in mine," he announced.  "No gettin' oryide for me, though there
ain't nothin' to stop me except I don't want to.  I've ben drunk once
since I seen you last, an' then it was unexpected, bein' on an empty
stomach.  When I work like a beast, I drink like a beast.  When I live
like a man, I drink like a man--a jolt now an' again when I feel like it,
an' that's all."

Martin arranged to meet him next day, and went on to the hotel.  He
paused in the office to look up steamer sailings.  The Mariposa sailed
for Tahiti in five days.

"Telephone over to-morrow and reserve a stateroom for me," he told the
clerk.  "No deck-stateroom, but down below, on the weather-side,--the
port-side, remember that, the port-side.  You'd better write it down."

Once in his room he got into bed and slipped off to sleep as gently as a
child.  The occurrences of the evening had made no impression on him.  His
mind was dead to impressions.  The glow of warmth with which he met Joe
had been most fleeting.  The succeeding minute he had been bothered by
the ex-laundryman's presence and by the compulsion of conversation.  That
in five more days he sailed for his loved South Seas meant nothing to
him.  So he closed his eyes and slept normally and comfortably for eight
uninterrupted hours.  He was not restless.  He did not change his
position, nor did he dream.  Sleep had become to him oblivion, and each
day that he awoke, he awoke with regret.  Life worried and bored him, and
time was a vexation.


