

CHAPTER XLVI


"Say, Joe," was his greeting to his old-time working-mate next morning,
"there's a Frenchman out on Twenty-eighth Street.  He's made a pot of
money, and he's going back to France.  It's a dandy, well-appointed,
small steam laundry.  There's a start for you if you want to settle down.
Here, take this; buy some clothes with it and be at this man's office by
ten o'clock.  He looked up the laundry for me, and he'll take you out and
show you around.  If you like it, and think it is worth the price--twelve
thousand--let me know and it is yours.  Now run along.  I'm busy.  I'll
see you later."

"Now look here, Mart," the other said slowly, with kindling anger, "I
come here this mornin' to see you.  Savve?  I didn't come here to get no
laundry.  I come a here for a talk for old friends' sake, and you shove a
laundry at me.  I tell you, what you can do.  You can take that laundry
an' go to hell."

He was out of the room when Martin caught him and whirled him around.

"Now look here, Joe," he said; "if you act that way, I'll punch your
head.  An for old friends' sake I'll punch it hard.  Savve?--you will,
will you?"

Joe had clinched and attempted to throw him, and he was twisting and
writhing out of the advantage of the other's hold.  They reeled about the
room, locked in each other's arms, and came down with a crash across the
splintered wreckage of a wicker chair.  Joe was underneath, with arms
spread out and held and with Martin's knee on his chest.  He was panting
and gasping for breath when Martin released him.

"Now we'll talk a moment," Martin said.  "You can't get fresh with me.  I
want that laundry business finished first of all.  Then you can come back
and we'll talk for old sake's sake.  I told you I was busy.  Look at
that."

A servant had just come in with the morning mail, a great mass of letters
and magazines.

"How can I wade through that and talk with you?  You go and fix up that
laundry, and then we'll get together."

"All right," Joe admitted reluctantly.  "I thought you was turnin' me
down, but I guess I was mistaken.  But you can't lick me, Mart, in a
stand-up fight.  I've got the reach on you."

"We'll put on the gloves sometime and see," Martin said with a smile.

"Sure; as soon as I get that laundry going."  Joe extended his arm.  "You
see that reach?  It'll make you go a few."

Martin heaved a sigh of relief when the door closed behind the
laundryman.  He was becoming anti-social.  Daily he found it a severer
strain to be decent with people.  Their presence perturbed him, and the
effort of conversation irritated him.  They made him restless, and no
sooner was he in contact with them than he was casting about for excuses
to get rid of them.

He did not proceed to attack his mail, and for a half hour he lolled in
his chair, doing nothing, while no more than vague, half-formed thoughts
occasionally filtered through his intelligence, or rather, at wide
intervals, themselves constituted the flickering of his intelligence.

He roused himself and began glancing through his mail.  There were a
dozen requests for autographs--he knew them at sight; there were
professional begging letters; and there were letters from cranks, ranging
from the man with a working model of perpetual motion, and the man who
demonstrated that the surface of the earth was the inside of a hollow
sphere, to the man seeking financial aid to purchase the Peninsula of
Lower California for the purpose of communist colonization.  There were
letters from women seeking to know him, and over one such he smiled, for
enclosed was her receipt for pew-rent, sent as evidence of her good faith
and as proof of her respectability.

Editors and publishers contributed to the daily heap of letters, the
former on their knees for his manuscripts, the latter on their knees for
his books--his poor disdained manuscripts that had kept all he possessed
in pawn for so many dreary months in order to fund them in postage.  There
were unexpected checks for English serial rights and for advance payments
on foreign translations.  His English agent announced the sale of German
translation rights in three of his books, and informed him that Swedish
editions, from which he could expect nothing because Sweden was not a
party to the Berne Convention, were already on the market.  Then there
was a nominal request for his permission for a Russian translation, that
country being likewise outside the Berne Convention.

He turned to the huge bundle of clippings which had come in from his
press bureau, and read about himself and his vogue, which had become a
furore.  All his creative output had been flung to the public in one
magnificent sweep.  That seemed to account for it.  He had taken the
public off its feet, the way Kipling had, that time when he lay near to
death and all the mob, animated by a mob-mind thought, began suddenly to
read him.  Martin remembered how that same world-mob, having read him and
acclaimed him and not understood him in the least, had, abruptly, a few
months later, flung itself upon him and torn him to pieces.  Martin
grinned at the thought.  Who was he that he should not be similarly
treated in a few more months?  Well, he would fool the mob.  He would be
away, in the South Seas, building his grass house, trading for pearls and
copra, jumping reefs in frail outriggers, catching sharks and bonitas,
hunting wild goats among the cliffs of the valley that lay next to the
valley of Taiohae.

In the moment of that thought the desperateness of his situation dawned
upon him.  He saw, cleared eyed, that he was in the Valley of the Shadow.
All the life that was in him was fading, fainting, making toward death.

He realized how much he slept, and how much he desired to sleep.  Of old,
he had hated sleep.  It had robbed him of precious moments of living.
Four hours of sleep in the twenty-four had meant being robbed of four
hours of life.  How he had grudged sleep!  Now it was life he grudged.
Life was not good; its taste in his mouth was without tang, and bitter.
This was his peril.  Life that did not yearn toward life was in fair way
toward ceasing.  Some remote instinct for preservation stirred in him,
and he knew he must get away.  He glanced about the room, and the thought
of packing was burdensome.  Perhaps it would be better to leave that to
the last.  In the meantime he might be getting an outfit.

He put on his hat and went out, stopping in at a gun-store, where he
spent the remainder of the morning buying automatic rifles, ammunition,
and fishing tackle.  Fashions changed in trading, and he knew he would
have to wait till he reached Tahiti before ordering his trade-goods.  They
could come up from Australia, anyway.  This solution was a source of
pleasure.  He had avoided doing something, and the doing of anything just
now was unpleasant.  He went back to the hotel gladly, with a feeling of
satisfaction in that the comfortable Morris chair was waiting for him;
and he groaned inwardly, on entering his room, at sight of Joe in the
Morris chair.

Joe was delighted with the laundry.  Everything was settled, and he would
enter into possession next day.  Martin lay on the bed, with closed eyes,
while the other talked on.  Martin's thoughts were far away--so far away
that he was rarely aware that he was thinking.  It was only by an effort
that he occasionally responded.  And yet this was Joe, whom he had always
liked.  But Joe was too keen with life.  The boisterous impact of it on
Martin's jaded mind was a hurt.  It was an aching probe to his tired
sensitiveness.  When Joe reminded him that sometime in the future they
were going to put on the gloves together, he could almost have screamed.

"Remember, Joe, you're to run the laundry according to those old rules
you used to lay down at Shelly Hot Springs," he said.  "No overworking.
No working at night.  And no children at the mangles.  No children
anywhere.  And a fair wage."

Joe nodded and pulled out a note-book.

"Look at here.  I was workin' out them rules before breakfast this A.M.
What d'ye think of them?"

He read them aloud, and Martin approved, worrying at the same time as to
when Joe would take himself off.

It was late afternoon when he awoke.  Slowly the fact of life came back
to him.  He glanced about the room.  Joe had evidently stolen away after
he had dozed off.  That was considerate of Joe, he thought.  Then he
closed his eyes and slept again.

In the days that followed Joe was too busy organizing and taking hold of
the laundry to bother him much; and it was not until the day before
sailing that the newspapers made the announcement that he had taken
passage on the Mariposa.  Once, when the instinct of preservation
fluttered, he went to a doctor and underwent a searching physical
examination.  Nothing could be found the matter with him.  His heart and
lungs were pronounced magnificent.  Every organ, so far as the doctor
could know, was normal and was working normally.

"There is nothing the matter with you, Mr. Eden," he said, "positively
nothing the matter with you.  You are in the pink of condition.  Candidly,
I envy you your health.  It is superb.  Look at that chest.  There, and
in your stomach, lies the secret of your remarkable constitution.
Physically, you are a man in a thousand--in ten thousand.  Barring
accidents, you should live to be a hundred."

And Martin knew that Lizzie's diagnosis had been correct.  Physically he
was all right.  It was his "think-machine" that had gone wrong, and there
was no cure for that except to get away to the South Seas.  The trouble
was that now, on the verge of departure, he had no desire to go.  The
South Seas charmed him no more than did bourgeois civilization.  There
was no zest in the thought of departure, while the act of departure
appalled him as a weariness of the flesh.  He would have felt better if
he were already on board and gone.

The last day was a sore trial.  Having read of his sailing in the morning
papers, Bernard Higginbotham, Gertrude, and all the family came to say
good-by, as did Hermann von Schmidt and Marian.  Then there was business
to be transacted, bills to be paid, and everlasting reporters to be
endured.  He said good-by to Lizzie Connolly, abruptly, at the entrance
to night school, and hurried away.  At the hotel he found Joe, too busy
all day with the laundry to have come to him earlier.  It was the last
straw, but Martin gripped the arms of his chair and talked and listened
for half an hour.

"You know, Joe," he said, "that you are not tied down to that laundry.
There are no strings on it.  You can sell it any time and blow the money.
Any time you get sick of it and want to hit the road, just pull out.  Do
what will make you the happiest."

Joe shook his head.

"No more road in mine, thank you kindly.  Hoboin's all right, exceptin'
for one thing--the girls.  I can't help it, but I'm a ladies' man.  I
can't get along without 'em, and you've got to get along without 'em when
you're hoboin'.  The times I've passed by houses where dances an' parties
was goin' on, an' heard the women laugh, an' saw their white dresses and
smiling faces through the windows--Gee!  I tell you them moments was
plain hell.  I like dancin' an' picnics, an' walking in the moonlight,
an' all the rest too well.  Me for the laundry, and a good front, with
big iron dollars clinkin' in my jeans.  I seen a girl already, just
yesterday, and, d'ye know, I'm feelin' already I'd just as soon marry her
as not.  I've ben whistlin' all day at the thought of it.  She's a beaut,
with the kindest eyes and softest voice you ever heard.  Me for her, you
can stack on that.  Say, why don't you get married with all this money to
burn?  You could get the finest girl in the land."

Martin shook his head with a smile, but in his secret heart he was
wondering why any man wanted to marry.  It seemed an amazing and
incomprehensible thing.

From the deck of the Mariposa, at the sailing hour, he saw Lizzie
Connolly hiding in the skirts of the crowd on the wharf.  Take her with
you, came the thought.  It is easy to be kind.  She will be supremely
happy.  It was almost a temptation one moment, and the succeeding moment
it became a terror.  He was in a panic at the thought of it.  His tired
soul cried out in protest.  He turned away from the rail with a groan,
muttering, "Man, you are too sick, you are too sick."

He fled to his stateroom, where he lurked until the steamer was clear of
the dock.  In the dining saloon, at luncheon, he found himself in the
place of honor, at the captain's right; and he was not long in
discovering that he was the great man on board.  But no more
unsatisfactory great man ever sailed on a ship.  He spent the afternoon
in a deck-chair, with closed eyes, dozing brokenly most of the time, and
in the evening went early to bed.

After the second day, recovered from seasickness, the full passenger list
was in evidence, and the more he saw of the passengers the more he
disliked them.  Yet he knew that he did them injustice.  They were good
and kindly people, he forced himself to acknowledge, and in the moment of
acknowledgment he qualified--good and kindly like all the bourgeoisie,
with all the psychological cramp and intellectual futility of their kind,
they bored him when they talked with him, their little superficial minds
were so filled with emptiness; while the boisterous high spirits and the
excessive energy of the younger people shocked him.  They were never
quiet, ceaselessly playing deck-quoits, tossing rings, promenading, or
rushing to the rail with loud cries to watch the leaping porpoises and
the first schools of flying fish.

He slept much.  After breakfast he sought his deck-chair with a magazine
he never finished.  The printed pages tired him.  He puzzled that men
found so much to write about, and, puzzling, dozed in his chair.  When
the gong awoke him for luncheon, he was irritated that he must awaken.
There was no satisfaction in being awake.

Once, he tried to arouse himself from his lethargy, and went forward into
the forecastle with the sailors.  But the breed of sailors seemed to have
changed since the days he had lived in the forecastle.  He could find no
kinship with these stolid-faced, ox-minded bestial creatures.  He was in
despair.  Up above nobody had wanted Martin Eden for his own sake, and he
could not go back to those of his own class who had wanted him in the
past.  He did not want them.  He could not stand them any more than he
could stand the stupid first-cabin passengers and the riotous young
people.

Life was to him like strong, white light that hurts the tired eyes of a
sick person.  During every conscious moment life blazed in a raw glare
around him and upon him.  It hurt.  It hurt intolerably.  It was the
first time in his life that Martin had travelled first class.  On ships
at sea he had always been in the forecastle, the steerage, or in the
black depths of the coal-hold, passing coal.  In those days, climbing up
the iron ladders out the pit of stifling heat, he had often caught
glimpses of the passengers, in cool white, doing nothing but enjoy
themselves, under awnings spread to keep the sun and wind away from them,
with subservient stewards taking care of their every want and whim, and
it had seemed to him that the realm in which they moved and had their
being was nothing else than paradise.  Well, here he was, the great man
on board, in the midmost centre of it, sitting at the captain's right
hand, and yet vainly harking back to forecastle and stoke-hole in quest
of the Paradise he had lost.  He had found no new one, and now he could
not find the old one.

He strove to stir himself and find something to interest him.  He
ventured the petty officers' mess, and was glad to get away.  He talked
with a quartermaster off duty, an intelligent man who promptly prodded
him with the socialist propaganda and forced into his hands a bunch of
leaflets and pamphlets.  He listened to the man expounding the
slave-morality, and as he listened, he thought languidly of his own
Nietzsche philosophy.  But what was it worth, after all?  He remembered
one of Nietzsche's mad utterances wherein that madman had doubted truth.
And who was to say?  Perhaps Nietzsche had been right.  Perhaps there was
no truth in anything, no truth in truth--no such thing as truth.  But his
mind wearied quickly, and he was content to go back to his chair and
doze.

Miserable as he was on the steamer, a new misery came upon him.  What
when the steamer reached Tahiti?  He would have to go ashore.  He would
have to order his trade-goods, to find a passage on a schooner to the
Marquesas, to do a thousand and one things that were awful to
contemplate.  Whenever he steeled himself deliberately to think, he could
see the desperate peril in which he stood.  In all truth, he was in the
Valley of the Shadow, and his danger lay in that he was not afraid.  If
he were only afraid, he would make toward life.  Being unafraid, he was
drifting deeper into the shadow.  He found no delight in the old familiar
things of life.  The Mariposa was now in the northeast trades, and this
wine of wind, surging against him, irritated him.  He had his chair moved
to escape the embrace of this lusty comrade of old days and nights.

The day the Mariposa entered the doldrums, Martin was more miserable than
ever.  He could no longer sleep.  He was soaked with sleep, and perforce
he must now stay awake and endure the white glare of life.  He moved
about restlessly.  The air was sticky and humid, and the rain-squalls
were unrefreshing.  He ached with life.  He walked around the deck until
that hurt too much, then sat in his chair until he was compelled to walk
again.  He forced himself at last to finish the magazine, and from the
steamer library he culled several volumes of poetry.  But they could not
hold him, and once more he took to walking.

He stayed late on deck, after dinner, but that did not help him, for when
he went below, he could not sleep.  This surcease from life had failed
him.  It was too much.  He turned on the electric light and tried to
read.  One of the volumes was a Swinburne.  He lay in bed, glancing
through its pages, until suddenly he became aware that he was reading
with interest.  He finished the stanza, attempted to read on, then came
back to it.  He rested the book face downward on his breast and fell to
thinking.  That was it.  The very thing.  Strange that it had never come
to him before.  That was the meaning of it all; he had been drifting that
way all the time, and now Swinburne showed him that it was the happy way
out.  He wanted rest, and here was rest awaiting him.  He glanced at the
open port-hole.  Yes, it was large enough.  For the first time in weeks
he felt happy.  At last he had discovered the cure of his ill.  He picked
up the book and read the stanza slowly aloud:-

   "'From too much love of living,
   From hope and fear set free,
   We thank with brief thanksgiving
   Whatever gods may be
   That no life lives forever;
   That dead men rise up never;
   That even the weariest river
   Winds somewhere safe to sea.'"

He looked again at the open port.  Swinburne had furnished the key.  Life
was ill, or, rather, it had become ill--an unbearable thing.  "That dead
men rise up never!"  That line stirred him with a profound feeling of
gratitude.  It was the one beneficent thing in the universe.  When life
became an aching weariness, death was ready to soothe away to everlasting
sleep.  But what was he waiting for?  It was time to go.

He arose and thrust his head out the port-hole, looking down into the
milky wash.  The Mariposa was deeply loaded, and, hanging by his hands,
his feet would be in the water.  He could slip in noiselessly.  No one
would hear.  A smother of spray dashed up, wetting his face.  It tasted
salt on his lips, and the taste was good.  He wondered if he ought to
write a swan-song, but laughed the thought away.  There was no time.  He
was too impatient to be gone.

Turning off the light in his room so that it might not betray him, he
went out the port-hole feet first.  His shoulders stuck, and he forced
himself back so as to try it with one arm down by his side.  A roll of
the steamer aided him, and he was through, hanging by his hands.  When
his feet touched the sea, he let go.  He was in a milky froth of water.
The side of the Mariposa rushed past him like a dark wall, broken here
and there by lighted ports.  She was certainly making time.  Almost
before he knew it, he was astern, swimming gently on the foam-crackling
surface.

A bonita struck at his white body, and he laughed aloud.  It had taken a
piece out, and the sting of it reminded him of why he was there.  In the
work to do he had forgotten the purpose of it.  The lights of the
Mariposa were growing dim in the distance, and there he was, swimming
confidently, as though it were his intention to make for the nearest land
a thousand miles or so away.

It was the automatic instinct to live.  He ceased swimming, but the
moment he felt the water rising above his mouth the hands struck out
sharply with a lifting movement.  The will to live, was his thought, and
the thought was accompanied by a sneer.  Well, he had will,--ay, will
strong enough that with one last exertion it could destroy itself and
cease to be.

He changed his position to a vertical one.  He glanced up at the quiet
stars, at the same time emptying his lungs of air.  With swift, vigorous
propulsion of hands and feet, he lifted his shoulders and half his chest
out of water.  This was to gain impetus for the descent.  Then he let
himself go and sank without movement, a white statue, into the sea.  He
breathed in the water deeply, deliberately, after the manner of a man
taking an anaesthetic.  When he strangled, quite involuntarily his arms
and legs clawed the water and drove him up to the surface and into the
clear sight of the stars.

The will to live, he thought disdainfully, vainly endeavoring not to
breathe the air into his bursting lungs.  Well, he would have to try a
new way.  He filled his lungs with air, filled them full.  This supply
would take him far down.  He turned over and went down head first,
swimming with all his strength and all his will.  Deeper and deeper he
went.  His eyes were open, and he watched the ghostly, phosphorescent
trails of the darting bonita.  As he swam, he hoped that they would not
strike at him, for it might snap the tension of his will.  But they did
not strike, and he found time to be grateful for this last kindness of
life.

Down, down, he swam till his arms and leg grew tired and hardly moved.  He
knew that he was deep.  The pressure on his ear-drums was a pain, and
there was a buzzing in his head.  His endurance was faltering, but he
compelled his arms and legs to drive him deeper until his will snapped
and the air drove from his lungs in a great explosive rush.  The bubbles
rubbed and bounded like tiny balloons against his cheeks and eyes as they
took their upward flight.  Then came pain and strangulation.  This hurt
was not death, was the thought that oscillated through his reeling
consciousness.  Death did not hurt.  It was life, the pangs of life, this
awful, suffocating feeling; it was the last blow life could deal him.

His wilful hands and feet began to beat and churn about, spasmodically
and feebly.  But he had fooled them and the will to live that made them
beat and churn.  He was too deep down.  They could never bring him to the
surface.  He seemed floating languidly in a sea of dreamy vision.  Colors
and radiances surrounded him and bathed him and pervaded him.  What was
that?  It seemed a lighthouse; but it was inside his brain--a flashing,
bright white light.  It flashed swifter and swifter.  There was a long
rumble of sound, and it seemed to him that he was falling down a vast and
interminable stairway.  And somewhere at the bottom he fell into
darkness.  That much he knew.  He had fallen into darkness.  And at the
instant he knew, he ceased to know.
