CHAPTER SIXTEEN

MELANCHOLY CONDITION--OCCURRENCE AT THE TI--ANECDOTE OF MARHEYO--SHAVING
THE HEAD OF A WARRIOR

IN looking back to this period, and calling to remembrance the
numberless proofs of kindness and respect which I received from the
natives of the valley, I can scarcely understand how it was that, in the
midst of so many consolatory circumstances, my mind should still have
been consumed by the most dismal forebodings, and have remained a
prey to the profoundest melancholy. It is true that the suspicious
circumstances which had attended the disappearance of Toby were enough
of themselves to excite distrust with regard to the savages, in whose
power I felt myself to be entirely placed, especially when it was
combined with the knowledge that these very men, kind and respectful
as they were to me, were, after all, nothing better than a set of
cannibals.

But my chief source of anxiety, and that which poisoned every temporary
enjoyment, was the mysterious disease in my leg, which still remained
unabated. All the herbal applications of Tinor, united with the severer
discipline of the old leech, and the affectionate nursing of Kory-Kory,
had failed to relieve me. I was almost a cripple, and the pain I endured
at intervals was agonizing. The unaccountable malady showed no signs
of amendment: on the contrary, its violence increased day by day, and
threatened the most fatal results, unless some powerful means were
employed to counteract it. It seemed as if I were destined to sink
under this grievous affliction, or at least that it would hinder me from
availing myself of any opportunity of escaping from the valley.

An incident which occurred as nearly as I can estimate about three weeks
after the disappearance of Toby, convinced me that the natives, from
some reason or other, would interpose every possible obstacle to my
leaving them.

One morning there was no little excitement evinced by the people near
my abode, and which I soon discovered proceeded from a vague report
that boats, had been seen at a great distance approaching the bay.
Immediately all was bustle and animation. It so happened that day that
the pain I suffered having somewhat abated, and feeling in much better
spirits than usual, I had complied with Kory-Kory’s invitation to visit
the chief Mehevi at the place called the ‘Ti’, which I have before
described as being situated within the precincts of the Taboo Groves.
These sacred recesses were at no great distance from Marheyo’s
habitation, and lay between it and the sea; the path that conducted to
the beach passing directly in front of the Ti, and thence skirting along
the border of the groves.

I was reposing upon the mats, within the sacred building, in company
with Mehevi and several other chiefs, when the announcement was first
made. It sent a thrill of joy through my whole frame;--perhaps Toby was
about to return. I rose at once to my feet, and my instinctive impulse
was to hurry down to the beach, equally regardless of the distance that
separated me from it, and of my disabled condition. As soon as Mehevi
noticed the effect the intelligence had produced upon me, and the
impatience I betrayed to reach the sea, his countenance assumed that
inflexible rigidity of expression which had so awed me on the afternoon
of our arrival at the house of Marheyo. As I was proceeding to leave
the Ti, he laid his hand upon my shoulder, and said gravely, ‘abo, abo’
(wait, wait). Solely intent upon the one thought that occupied my mind,
and heedless of his request, I was brushing past him, when suddenly he
assumed a tone of authority, and told me to ‘moee’ (sit down). Though
struck by the alteration in his demeanour, the excitement under which I
laboured was too strong to permit me to obey the unexpected command,
and I was still limping towards the edge of the pi-pi with Kory-Kory
clinging to one arm in his efforts to restrain me, when the natives
around started to their feet, ranged themselves along the open front of
the building, while Mehevi looked at me scowlingly, and reiterated his
commands still more sternly.

It was at this moment, when fifty savage countenances were glaring upon
me, that I first truly experienced I was indeed a captive in the
valley. The conviction rushed upon me with staggering force, and I was
overwhelmed by this confirmation of my worst fears. I saw at once that
it was useless for me to resist, and sick at heart, I reseated myself
upon the mats, and for the moment abandoned myself to despair.

I now perceived the natives one after the other hurrying past the Ti and
pursuing the route that conducted to the sea. These savages, thought
I, will soon be holding communication with some of my own countrymen
perhaps, who with ease could restore me to liberty did they know of the
situation I was in. No language can describe the wretchedness which I
felt; and in the bitterness of my soul I imprecated a thousand curses on
the perfidious Toby, who had thus abandoned me to destruction. It was in
vain that Kory-Kory tempted me with food, or lighted my pipe, or sought
to attract my attention by performing the uncouth antics that
had sometimes diverted me. I was fairly knocked down by this last
misfortune, which, much as I had feared it, I had never before had the
courage calmly to contemplate.

Regardless of everything but my own sorrow, I remained in the Ti for
several hours, until shouts proceeding at intervals from the groves
beyond the house proclaimed the return of the natives from the beach.

Whether any boats visited the bay that morning or not, I never could
ascertain. The savages assured me that there had not--but I was inclined
to believe that by deceiving me in this particular they sought to allay
the violence of my grief. However that might be, this incident showed
plainly that the Typees intended to hold me a prisoner. As they still
treated me with the same sedulous attention as before, I was utterly
at a loss how to account for their singular conduct. Had I been in a
situation to instruct them in any of the rudiments of the mechanic arts,
or had I manifested a disposition to render myself in any way useful
among them, their conduct might have been attributed to some adequate
motive, but as it was, the matter seemed to me inexplicable.

During my whole stay on the island there occurred but two or three
instances where the natives applied to me with the view of availing
themselves of my superior information; and these now appear so ludicrous
that I cannot forbear relating them.

The few things we had brought from Nukuheva had been done up into a
small bundle which we had carried with us in our descent to the valley.
This bundle, the first night of our arrival, I had used as a pillow, but
on the succeeding morning, opening it for the inspection of the natives,
they gazed upon the miscellaneous contents as though I had just revealed
to them a casket of diamonds, and they insisted that so precious a
treasure should be properly secured. A line was accordingly attached to
it, and the other end being passed over the ridge-pole of the house, it
was hoisted up to the apex of the roof, where it hung suspended directly
over the mats where I usually reclined. When I desired anything from it
I merely raised my finger to a bamboo beside me, and taking hold of
the string which was there fastened, lowered the package. This was
exceedingly handy, and I took care to let the natives understand how
much I applauded the invention. Of this package the chief contents were
a razor with its case, a supply of needles and thread, a pound or two of
tobacco and a few yards of bright-coloured calico.

I should have mentioned that shortly after Toby’s disappearance,
perceiving the uncertainty of the time I might be obliged to remain in
the valley--if, indeed, I ever should escape from it--and considering
that my whole wardrobe consisted of a shirt and a pair of trousers, I
resolved to doff these garments at once, in order to preserve them in
a suitable condition for wear should I again appear among civilized
beings. I was consequently obliged to assume the Typee costume, a little
altered, however, to suit my own views of propriety, and in which I have
no doubt I appeared to as much advantage as a senator of Rome enveloped
in the folds of his toga. A few folds of yellow tappa tucked about my
waist, descended to my feet in the style of a lady’s petticoat, only
I did not have recourse to those voluminous paddings in the rear with
which our gentle dames are in the habit of augmenting the sublime
rotundity of their figures. This usually comprised my in-door dress;
whenever I walked out, I superadded to it an ample robe of the same
material, which completely enveloped my person, and screened it from the
rays of the sun.

One morning I made a rent in this mantle; and to show the islanders with
what facility it could be repaired, I lowered my bundle, and taking
from it a needle and thread, proceeded to stitch up the opening. They
regarded this wonderful application of science with intense admiration;
and whilst I was stitching away, old Marheyo, who was one of the
lookers-on, suddenly clapped his hand to his forehead, and rushing to
a corner of the house, drew forth a soiled and tattered strip of faded
calico which he must have procured some time or other in traffic on the
beach--and besought me eagerly to exercise a little of my art upon it.
I willingly complied, though certainly so stumpy a needle as mine never
took such gigantic strides over calico before. The repairs completed,
old Marheyo gave me a paternal hug; and divesting himself of his ‘maro’
(girdle), swathed the calico about his loins, and slipping the beloved
ornaments into his ears, grasped his spear and sallied out of the house,
like a valiant Templar arrayed in a new and costly suit of armour.

I never used my razor during my stay in the island, but although a
very subordinate affair, it had been vastly admired by the Typees; and
Narmonee, a great hero among them, who was exceedingly precise in the
arrangements of his toilet and the general adjustment of is person,
being the most accurately tattooed and laboriously horrified individual
in all the valley, thought it would be a great advantage to have it
applied to the already shaven crown of his head.

The implement they usually employ is a shark’s tooth, which is about as
well adapted to the purpose as a one-pronged fork for pitching hay. No
wonder, then, that the acute Narmonee perceived the advantage my razor
possessed over the usual implement. Accordingly, one day he requested as
a personal favour that I would just run over his head with the razor. In
reply, I gave him to understand that it was too dull, and could not be
used to any purpose without being previously sharpened. To assist my
meaning, I went through an imaginary honing process on the palm of my
hand. Narmonee took my meaning in an instant, and running out of the
house, returned the next moment with a huge rough mass of rock as big
as a millstone, and indicated to me that that was exactly the thing
I wanted. Of course there was nothing left for me but to proceed to
business, and I began scraping away at a great rate. He writhed and
wriggled under the infliction, but, fully convinced of my skill, endured
the pain like a martyr.

Though I never saw Narmonee in battle I will, from what I then observed,
stake my life upon his courage and fortitude. Before commencing
operations, his head had presented a surface of short bristling hairs,
and by the time I had concluded my unskilful operation it resembled not
a little a stubble field after being gone over with a harrow. However,
as the chief expressed the liveliest satisfaction at the result, I was
too wise to dissent from his opinion.



